The Language of Fashion.
History and Sociology of Clothing: Some Methodological Observations.Up until the start of the nineteenth century there had not been, in the true sense of the word, a history of dress, but only studies in ancient archaeology or of qualitative inventories of garments. At first, the history of dress was an essentially romantic notion, either providing artists, painters or men of the theatre with the necessary figurative elements of ‘local color’, or enabling the historian to establish an equivalence between vestimentary form and the general mindset of the time or of the place (Volksgeist, Zeitgeist, spirit of the times, moral disposition, atmosphere, style, etc.). 
Truly scientific research on dress started in about 1860 with work by scholars and archivists such as Quicherat, Demay or Enlart, or by medievalists in general. 
Their principal method was to treat dress as the sum of individual pieces and the garment itself as a kind of historical event, the main aim of which being above all to locate its date of birth and the circumstances surrounding it. 
This kind of work still dominates, to the extent that it continues to inspire the numerous vulgarized histories that abound to this day and that are linked to the development of fashion’s commercial myth-making. So the history of dress is yet to benefit from the renewal of historical studies that has been taking place in France for the last thirty years: this renewal has taken account of the social and economic dimension of history, of the links between clothes and human emotional phenomena as defined by Lucien Febvre, of the demand for an ideological understanding of the past as postulated by marxist historians. In fact, it is the whole institutional perspective on dress that is missing, a gap all the more paradoxical given that dress is both a historical and a sociological object if ever there was one.
So the inadequacies in histories of dress that we have so far are, first and foremost, those that are evident in all historicist forms of history. And yet the study of dress poses a particular epistemological problem which we would at least like to underline here: namely, that posed by the analysis of any structure as soon as it is placed in its history but is not allowed to cease being a structure. An item of clothing is indeed, at every moment of history, this balance of normative forms, all of which are constantly changing.Histories of dress have resolved this problem, but only in a confused way. Confronted with the obligation to work on forms, they have tried to list differences: some of these are internal to the vestimentary system itself (the changes in profile), and the others, external ones, are borrowed from general history (using epoch, country, social class). There is a general weakness in these responses which is to be found both on the level of analysis and of synthesis. With regards to internal differences, no history of dress has yet bothered to take the time to define what, at any given moment, a vestimentary system might be, that is the overall axiology (constraints, prohibitions, tolerances, aberrations, fantasies, congruences and exclusions) that constitutes it. 
The archetypes we are given are purely graphic, that is, more aesthetic than sociological. 
What’s more, on the level of the garment itself, despite the seriousness of the inventories compiled, the analysis remains confused. On the one hand, the qualitative threshold beyond which an item changes either its form or its function is rarely stated; in other words, the very object of historical research remains ambiguous: when does an item of clothing really change, when is there really history? On the other hand, the position of the item on the body’s horizontal axis (the degrees of exteriority) is discussed only prudishly, so that the whole complex game of undergarments, garments and overgarments is never analyzed in relation to their social acceptability.
The attempts at external differentiation may appear more reliable, in that they are guaranteed by a general history with which we are already familiar. However, even here there is a lot missing, which is again indicative of the epistemological difficulty we mentioned earlier. Geographically speaking, histories of dress have not taken stock of the law established by folklorists in relation to folkloric facts. any vestimentary system is either regional or international, but it is never national. The geographical presentation in histories of dress is always based on a ‘leadership’ in fashion which is aristocratic, without this leadership ever being placed in its political nor, in this instance, European context. Socially, moreover, histories of dress rarely consider anything but royal or aristocratic outfits. not only is social class reduced here to an ‘image’ (the lord, the lady, etc.), deprived of its ideological content. But also, outside of the leisured classes, dress is never linked to the work experienced by the wearer: the whole problem of how clothes are functionalized is ignored. Finally, historical periodization is presented in these histories of dress in a distorting and narrow manner. The difficulties involved in any historical periodization are well known. Lucien Febvre proposed that we substitute one simple, central date for the two dates at both ends; this rule would be all the more appropriate in the history of dress given that, in relation to clothes, both the start and finish of a fashion (in its general sense) always occur over a period of time. 
In any case, if it is possible to date the appearance of a garment to within one year by finding its circumstantial origins, it is a distortion to confuse the invention of a fashion with its adoption and even more so to assign a rigorous end-date to any garment. 
But it is precisely this that nearly all the histories of dress do, fascinated as most of them are by the chronological prestige of a particular reign, or even by the reign’s political policies. In such a situation, the king remains magically affected by a charismatic function: he is considered, by essence, as the Wearer of Clothes.
These are the main gaps in the differential descriptions used by histories of dress. But they are, after all, weaknesses that any broad view of history could make good. The more serious problem (because it is more specific) with regard to fundamental errors in all existing histories of dress, is the methodological recklessness that confuses the internal and external criteria of differentiation. The garment is always conceived, implicitly, as the particular signifier of a general signified that is exterior to it (epoch, country, social class). But, without any indication, the historian will at one moment trace the history of the signifier, the evolution of profiles, whilst at the next moment tracing the history of the signified, of reigns and nations. now these histories do not necessarily have the same tempo. First, because fashion can easily produce its own rhythm: changes of forms have a relative independence in relation to the general history that supports them, even to the extent where fashion has only a finite number of archetypal forms, all of which implies, in the end, a partially cyclical history; and then, because history is by definition made up of a ‘social time which has a thousand high speeds and a thousand slow-downs’ (F. Braudel); consequently, the relations between vestimentary signifier and signified can never be determined in a simple and linear fashion.
Does it need to be pointed out that ‘Psychologies’ of dress, so numerous in the anglo-Saxon world, are not very helpful in this respect? They leave entirely untouched the whole methodological difficulty of linking a history of clothes at any one moment to its sociology. The motivations behind dressing have been much discussed, notably on the phylogenic level, which, we should remember, have involved so much fruitless discussion on the origins of language. Why does man dress up? The relative importance of the three following factors has been compared: protection, modesty, ornamentation. Dwelling above all on the relationship between adornment and protection, and taking liberties with certain ethnographic observations (people living in a harsh climate such as the indigenous population of Tierra del Fuego apparently prefer to adorn rather than protect themselves with clothes), or with certain traits in child psychology (the child apparently adorns and disguises itself but does not dress itself), specialists have felt able to suggest that the motivation for adornment is by far the most important factor. People have even tried to reserve the word ‘dress’ for acts of protection, and ‘adornment’ for acts of ornamentation. It seems that all these discussions are victims of a ‘psychological’ illusion: defining a social fact such as clothes as the sum of a certain number of instincts, which, once identified on a strictly individual level, are then simply ‘multiplied’ to the group level, is precisely the problem that sociology is trying to leave behind.
What should really interest the researcher, historian or sociologist, is not the passage from protection to ornamentation (an illusory shift), but the tendency of every bodily covering to insert itself into an organized, formal and normative system that is recognized by society. The first roman soldiers to throw a wool cover over their shoulders so as to protect themselves from the rain were performing an act of pure protection. 
But once material, form and usage have become not so much embellished, but simply regimented by a defined social group (for example, the slaves in Gallo-roman society around the second century), the garment has joined the system, has become dress (here the penula) without our being able to find in this shift any trace of an aesthetic aim. 
It is the appropriation by society of a form, or a use, through rules of manufacture, that creates a garment, not the variations in its utilitarian or decorative quantum. 
If a woman places a flower in her hair this remains a fact of pure and simple adornment, so long as the use (such as a bridegroom’s crown) or the positioning (such as a flower over the ear in Gypsy dress) have not been dictated by a social group; as soon as this happens it becomes a part of dress.
This seems to be a primary truth. however, we have seen how studies of dress, whether historical or psychological, have never really considered this as a system, that is as a structure whose individual elements never have any value and which are signifiers only in as much as they are linked by a group of collective norms. Certainly, profiles, archetypal forms have been identified, most notably in graphic representations. But system is completely different from gestalt; it is essentially defined by normative links which justify, oblige, prohibit, tolerate, in a word control the arrangement of garments on a concrete wearer who is identified in their social and historical place: it is a value. 
So it is expressly on the level of the social that dress must be described, not in terms of aesthetic forms or psychological motivations but in terms of institution. 
The historian and the sociologist are not charged with simply studying tastes, fashions or comfort; they must list, coordinate and explain the rules of matching and usage, of what is constrained or prohibited, tolerated or allowed. They must establish not the ‘images’ or the traits of social mores, but the links and the values; they must accept this as the precondition for any attempt to establish the relation between dress and history, because it is precisely the normative connections that are, in the final instance, the vehicle of meaning. Dress is essentially part of the axiological order.
Doubtless what explains the difficulties our authors have in treating dress as a system is that it is not easy to follow the evolution of a structure through time, the continuous succession of balances whose elements change in unequal measure. This difficulty has been encountered at least, and in part resolved, by linguistics. Since Saussure, we know that language, like dress, is both a system and a history, an individual act and a collective institution. Language and dress are, at any moment in history, complete structures, constituted organically by a functional network of norms and forms; and the transformation or displacement of any one element can modify the whole, producing a new structure: so, inevitably, we are talking about a collection of balances in movement, of institutions in flux. Without wanting to get into the argument over structuralism here, it is impossible to deny the central problem. This is not to say that the problem can be solved identically, in both linguistics and dress history. But at least we can expect contemporary linguistics to provide the study of dress with outlines, materials and terms for reflection that have been developed over the last fifty years or so. Therefore we must quickly examine the methodological effects of Saussurian models on studies of dress.
Langue and parole, dress and dressing.
We know that for Saussure human language can be studied from two directions, that of langue and that of parole. Langue is the social institution, independent of the individual; it is a normative reserve from which the individual draws their parole, ‘a virtual system that is actualized only in and through parole’. Parole is the individual act, ‘an actualized manifestation of the function of langage’, langage being a generic term for both langue and parole. It seems to be extremely useful, by way of an analogy to clothing, to identify an institutional, fundamentally social, reality, which, independent of the individual, is like the systematic, normative reserve from which the individual draws their own clothing, and which, in correspondence to Saussure’s langue, we propose to call dress. and then to distinguish this from a second, individual reality, the very act of ‘getting dressed’, in which the individual actualizes on their body the general inscription of dress, and which, corresponding to Saussure’s parole, we will call dressing. Dress and dressing form then a generic whole, for which we propose to retain the word clothing (this is language for Saussure).
We must obviously be careful about extending this analogy without due care and attention. only the functional opposition of the two levels can have any methodological value. This was spotted in relation to dress itself by Trubetskoy, who established a parallel between the tasks of phonetics and those of vestimentary description. The opposition dress/ dressing furthermore can only help to reinforce a sociological standpoint: by strongly characterizing dress as an institution and separating this institution from the concrete and individual acts by which it (so to speak) realizes itself, we can research and isolate the social components of dress: age groups, genders, classes, degrees of civilization, localization. Dressing then remains an empirical fact, capable of being analyzed with a phenomenological approach: the degree of scruffiness or dirtiness of a worn garment, for example, is part of dressing, it has no sociological value, except if scruffiness and dirtiness function as intentional signs (in a theatre costume for example). 
Conversely, a less obvious element of appearance, such as the differential mark in a garment for married and unmarried women in any society, will be part of dress and has a strong social value.
Dressing means the personal mode with which the wearer adopts (albeit badly) the dress that is proposed to them by their social group. It can have a morphological, psychological or circumstantial meaning, but it is not sociological.
Dress is the proper object of sociological and historical research, and we have already underlined the importance of the notion of vestimentary system.
Dress and dressing can appear to coincide sometimes, but it is not difficult to re-establish the distinction in each case: the broadness of the shoulders, for example. This is part of dressing when it corresponds exactly to the anatomy of the wearer; but part of dress when its dimension is prescribed by the group as part of a fashion. It is very obvious that there is a constant movement between dressing and dress, a dialectical exchange that is defined in relation to langue and parole as a veritable praxis.
For the sociologist it is obviously the move from dressing to dress which is the most important. This passage can be seen in the broadening of a dressing object (with the express condition that this broadening can be defined as a phenomenon of adoption), or even in a technological initiative taken by a clothes manufacturer or syndicated producer. 
For example, the wearing of a coat over the shoulders, arms dangling, becomes part of dress as soon as: (1) a community makes it into a distinctive mark imposed on its members (for example, Brothers of the Ecoles chrétiennes); (2) the manufacturer provides the coats with internal straps for the arms with which to support the coat without rolling the sleeves up (English system). It must be noted that a dressing object that is at first constituted by the degrading of a dress object can subsequently transform itself once more into a secondary dress object: this occurs as soon as this degrading actually functions as a collective sign, as a value. For example, the outfit can gesture towards the using of all of the buttons on the shirt; and then a dressing object of some sort leaves the top two buttons undone: this omission becomes dress again as soon as it is constituted as a norm by a particular group (such as in dandyism).
Fashion is always part of dress; but its origins can represent either of our two categories. Fashion can be part of a dress object that has been artificially elaborated by specialists at any one moment (for example, haute couture); at another moment, it can be constructed by the propagation of a simple act of dressing that is then reproduced at the collective level and for a number of reasons. This ordering of objects needs to be studied carefully. But what we can perhaps now foresee is that the link between dressing and dress is a semantic one: the meaning of a garment increases as we move from dressing to dress. 
Dressing is a weak form of meaning, it expresses more than it notifies; dress on the contrary is a strong form of meaning, it constitutes an intellectual, notifying relation between a wearer and their group.Diachrony and synchrony.We have already pointed out that it was necessary to distinguish in clothes between the synchronic or systematic level and the diachronic or processive level. once again as with language, the major problem here is that of putting together, in a truly dialectical snapshot, the link between system and process. George h. Darwin, nephew of Charles Darwin, got an inkling of this problem when he established a parallel between biological and vestimentary development, with the garment corresponding to an organism and the system (a whole type of garments) to a species. In fact, the problem cannot be resolved so long as the system has not been defined according to internal criteria, something that histories of dress have not yet done. Linguistics, for its part, is in the process of working to clarify the links between synchrony and diachrony, without yet succeeding; in other words, the science of dress, which has as yet to be constituted, has so far not carefully examined the data. But by looking to the example of linguistics we are able to suggest two methodological caveats—historical and sociological—to guide us towards a definitive explanation. We must first agree to make the notion of system more flexible, that is to think of structures in terms of tendencies rather than perhaps in terms of a rigid equilibrium. Clothes live in tight symbiosis with their historical context, much more so than language; violent historical episodes (wars, exoduses, revolutions) can rapidly smash a system; but also, in contrast to language, the recasting of the system is much quicker. 
however, it would not be desirable, at this point, to reintroduce, into the flux of vestimentary forms, any external determinisms before having identified all of the internal factors that, within the system itself, play at least a part in its evolution.Signifier and signified.
as we know, Saussure posited a science of meanings under the name of semiology, of which linguistic semantics would be but a part. It goes without saying that dress—which cannot be reduced to its protective or ornamental function—is a privileged semiological field: one could say that it is the signifying function of dress which makes it a total social object. Drawing on the observations on the sign made by Ignace Meyerson, let us distinguish, for dress, between indexical objects and signifying or notifying ones:Indices.
The index operates outside of any intention of directed behavior. The link that many histories have established between dress and the ‘spirit’ of an age would be part of the indexical, if such a link could be proven to have any scientific power which is, as yet, far from being the case. We find more reliable indexical objects in studies by a certain number of anglo-Saxon writers, where dress is treated as the index of a certain interiority. This research has taken two directions. Firstly, it has been properly psychological (in the united States), in the sense of a psychology of choices and motivations, in which attempts have been made to identify the hierarchy of motives in vestimentary choices, with the aid of questionnaires and even tests. But here we are really talking about a limited number of indices which the psychology in question has never tried to link to a psychic, or social, totality. The second direction in this research on the psychology of dress takes its inspiration from psychoanalysis, in the widest sense of the term. It is easy for everyone to see what a psychoanalytical reading could find in a cultural object whose erotic implications are fairly obvious and whose formal characteristics lend themselves easily to symbolic interpretations; these attempts at explaining cannot be assessed without making an overall judgement on psychoanalysis itself, which is not our job here. however, whilst remaining outside of a psychoanalytical postulate, it seems that analyses of this type are more fruitful when it comes to describing what we might call expressions of personality (self-expression, self-bodility, in the classifications made by Flügel), than when analysing symbolization proper, where we have, it seems, to be wary of ‘shortcuts’. From a methodological point of view what is interesting in a psychoanalytical explanation, is that the notion of index is itself ambiguous: is vestimentary form really an index, produced outside of any intention? Within the psychoanalytical perspective there is always an (unconscious) choice of an outfit by the collective, or of a way of dressing on the part of the wearer; and here dress is always set up as an object for possible deciphering by the person reading it (group, super-Ego or analyst). Dress, for the psychoanalyst, is meaning more than index: the notion of censorship lays the basis for the notion of control in social psychology, just as the notion of sublimation is nothing other than the psychoanalytical version of the process of rationalization. It would appear then that the equivalences identified by psychoanalysis are more factors of expression than indices.Meanings or Notifications.
Between the indexical and the notifying, there may well be mobile and ill-defined boundaries: such and such an object of notification can come from a previous indexical object—the masculine sports-outfit (of English origin) was at first simply the index of the need for the liberation of the body; then, once detached from its function and becoming an outfit (a two-piece with tweed jacket), it signified, or notified, a need which, from then on, was less felt than accepted. Generally, the study of phenomena in vestimentary signification relies heavily on the care with which dress has been analysed as a synchronic system. This is because notifying phenomena can, and in fact must, always be defined in axiological terms: the system in itself is nothing but a form; it cannot signify anything except by recourse to extra-sociological considerations (philosophy of history or psychoanalysis). It is the degree of participation in the system (be it total submission, deviations, or aberrations) that is meaningful; the value of a system (that is, its value-for-ness) can be understood only via acceptances of, or challenges to, it.Dress is in fact nothing more than the signifier of a single main signified, which is the manner or the degree of the wearer’s participation (whether a group or individual). It goes without saying that this general signified capitalizes on a certain number of secondary concepts or signifieds, that vary according to how broad the groups are, and how formalized they are, and which are signalled through these signifieds: such and such an outfit can notify concepts of psychological or socio- psychological appearance: respectability, youthfulness, intellectuality, mourning, etc. But what is notified here, through these intermediaries, is essentially the degree of integration of the wearer in relation to the society in which they live. violent historical facts may disrupt the rhythms of fashion, bring in new systems and modify the regime of participation, but in no way do they explain the new forms. mourning clothes may have been white once, nowadays they are black; the symbolism of colours may have a historical interest; but the social dimension refers not to the colour of mourning but to the manner of participation implied by it. here we can see the structuralist distinction between phonetics and phonology. history may be interested by the evolution in funereal colours; but sociology, like phonology, is interested essentially in values of opposition, of the socially meaningful. Dress is, in the fullest sense, a ‘social model’, a more or less standardized picture of expected collective behaviour; and it is essentially at this level that it has meaning. In any case, the notion of vestimentary signified must be studied with great care. as mr meyerson has emphasized, it is a limit; in reality, we are talking about ‘complexes of meaning’, whose equivalence can be almost entirely free. an article of clothing may seem to be ‘meaningless’ in itself; so we must then, more than ever, get at its social and global function, and above all at its history; because the manner in which vestimentary values are presented (forms, colours, tailoring, etc.) can very well depend on an internal history of the system. Forms may very well follow general history in a free counterpoint. Certain forms may be only the ‘products’, the terms of an intrinsic evolution, and not at all ‘signs’; and there may be a historical arbitrariness and a certain meaningless in a garment, a ‘degree zero’, as the structuralists say, of vestimentary signs.We cannot stress too much, by a way of conclusion, that the history of dress has a general epistemological value. It actually suggests to the researcher the essential problems in all cultural analysis, culture being both system and process, institution and individual act, a reserve of expression and a signifying order. In this way, it is obviously dependent not only on the other human sciences around it but also on the epistemological stage that the social sciences in general have reached. Born at the same time as the science of history, the science of dress has long lagged behind its development and now is faced with the same difficulties; the only difference is that, of all of the types of cultural research, it has, up to now, been the most overlooked, abandoned above all to rather anecdotal banalities. The history of dress bears witness in its own way to the contradiction in any science of culture: every cultural fact is both a product of history and a resistance to history. The garment, for example, is at every moment a moving equilibrium, both produced and undermined by determinisms of nature, function and amplitude, some internal, others external to the system itself. The study of dress must retain continually the plurality of these determinisms. The central methodological warning is still never to postulate too hastily a direct equivalence between the superstructure (dress) and the infrastructure (history). Contemporary epistemology understands more and more that we need to study historico-social totality as a collection of links and functions. We believe that for clothes (as for language) these stages and functions are of an axiological nature; they are the values that bear witness to the creative power of society over itself.
Language and Clothing.at first sight, human clothing is a very promising subject to research or reflect upon: it is a complete phenomenon, the study of which requires at any one time a history, an economy, an ethnology, a technology and maybe even, as we will see in a moment, a type of linguistics. But above all, as an object of appearance, it flatters our modern curiosity about social psychology, inviting us to go beyond the obsolete limits of the individual and of society: what is interesting in clothing is that it seems to participate to the greatest depth in the widest sociality. We can imagine that researchers using the most recent social methods— psychoanalysis, marxism or structuralism—must naturally be interested in it, especially given that clothing is at first glance an everyday object, and is thus one of those most prominent of observed features in society that stimulates our keenest contemporary research.Given this ideal set of interests, the published research results are themselves actually rather meagre. If we look only at the bibliographical indications, which are as abundant as they are anarchic, clothing is a disappointing subject; even to the extent to which it seems to invite a unifying epistemology, it is elusive. here it is a picturesque spectacle (in countless albums for the general public), there a psychological phenomenon—but it is still never truly an object of sociological inquiry; the best reflections it has generated remain incidental: they are those by writers and philosophers, perhaps because they alone are sufficiently free from its perceived triviality. But if we move away from the realm of the aphorism, towards that of sociological description, we find in the very definition of clothing a methodological difficulty, which I would like to try to pin down by way of a quick history of the work so far.This history is relatively recent. of course, since the renaissance there have been works on clothing: these either had archaeological aims (with ancient clothing for example), or else they were inventories of clothes governed by social conditions: these inventories are veritable lexicons, linking vestimentary systems very tightly either to anthropological states (sex, age, marital status) or to social ones (bourgeoisie, nobility, peasantry, etc.), but it is clear that this sort of lexicon of clothing was possible only in a society which was starkly hierarchical, in which fashion was part of a real social ritual. on this subject I would like to cite an important work— Larmessin’s seventeenth-century Costumes grotesques—because it represents an imaginary state not unlike the superlative case that is this vestimentary lexicon. For each profession Larmessin composed a form of dress whose elements were borrowed as if in a dream from the tools of the relevant activity, which were then arranged into a sort of general line or signifying gestalt (the process is not dissimilar to the paintings of arcimboldo): it is a kind of frenetic pan-symbolism, a creation which is both poetic and intelligible, in which the profession is represented by its imaginary essence: calm forms for the pastry-maker, serpentine for the apothecary, pointed for the fireworks manufacturer, rounded and humped for the potter, etc.: in this fantasy, clothing ends up absorbing man completely, the worker is anatomically assimilated to the respective instruments and in the end it is an alienation which here is described poetically: Larmessin’s workers are robots avant la lettre.Dress history did not really begin until romanticism and then it was undertaken by theatre specialists; it is because actors wanted to play their roles in the clothes of the period that painters and designers began to strive systematically towards historical accuracy in appearances (clothing, sets, furniture and props), in short that denoted precisely by the term ‘costume’. So what was beginning to be reconstituted here was essentially roles, and the reality being sought was a purely theatrical one: myths such as kings, queens and lords were being openly reconstituted; the first consequence of this was that clothing was only ever analysed anthologically, as if it were a compilation; it was the attribute of a particular race, selected for romantic theatre: it was as if ordinary people had never been dressed; the second consequence, and perhaps more significant methodologically, was that the costume designer’s attention was drawn towards the picturesque, and not towards the design principle, towards the stage prop and not towards the system. Perhaps, paradoxically, the opportunities offered by drawing have profoundly harmed dress history: graphic, spontaneous representation removed all speculative work; an imperfectly established generality was being actualized on the spot. This is why the most methodologically sound illustrations are, in my view, those drawings which are overtly schematic, those which aim to arrive at a state of principle, or abstraction, with regard to the vestimentary system of a particular epoch, such as those by nevil Truman in Historic Costuming.apart from the theatre painters, however, there was a rather interesting whole literature on clothing in the first half of the nineteenth century, known as the Physiologies. The flourishing of these short monographs is well known, with their generally playful tone, covering the most varied aspects of what we would call today daily life, from the office employee to the tobacconist. There are a number of physiologies of clothing (the Corset, the Tie, the Shirt, the Glove, the hat). What is most interesting in these dissertations is their sociological aspect: the great movement within masculine dress towards standardization and democratization launched by the revolution and inspired in form by reference to the austerity of Quaker dress, was bringing about a whole revision of vestimentary values; seemingly déclassé, clothing could signal social distinctions only via a new value, namely that of distinction; inspired by dandyism, this was the role of the physiologies: to teach the aristocrat how to distinguish himself from the proletarian or from the bourgeois by the manner in which an item, now formally undifferentiated, was worn; as one of the Physiologies puts it, the tie has replaced the sword: in all of these opuscules found in the Physiologies an outline of an axiology of clothing is beginning to take shape. In the second half of the nineteenth century the romantic spirit gave way to archaeological research: clothing was now to be described by (mainly medievalist) scholars, item by item and according to a chronology borrowed from the traditional narrative of history (or ‘King’s history’). To the extent that this work is important, it is the methodological gaps which come into focus: these historians scrupulously established a history of items but not one of systems; thanks to them we know to within a year when a particular garment appeared—but much less when it disappeared, as inaugural phenomena are always much more marked than those in the process of obsolescence; we even know in the majority of cases what was the contingent cause of a particular fashion; but we have only a very scant knowledge of how the structures change; for a vestimentary structure is not a sum of items in which a few have changed according to circumstances; here, as elsewhere, a structure is defined both by what is legal (what is allowed and what is not) and by the sorts of play within this legality. historicism has not contributed to a true description of clothing systems; it considers an item merely as an event, where the problem is then simply one of being able to put a date on it. The result is that historical clothing appears to be a collection of available items, and not an approved set of combinations; in short it is facts and not values that have been collated; this problem is made all the more complicated by the well-known uncertainties about periodization in history: either we describe reigns, as if the king were the exclusive wearer of clothing, its ritual founder, but this would introduce anarchy into the vestimentary system itself because the temporal unity of a system is not necessarily the same as that of political history; or else we describe the permanent features and changes of global forms, but this can be achieved only by using a structuralist approach of which historicism is unaware. This is the unresolved problem: to be honest, we cannot blame historians for this if you consider that a neighbouring science such as linguistics, though extensively researched by generations of specialists, has only just barely begun to confront the difficult problem of the links between diachrony and synchrony.however, since the end of the nineteenth century, there have been a certain number of illustrated works, in the form of historical popularizations, which have tended to place clothing in relation to a reality external to its form, in short to postulate a transcendence of dress. These comparisons have assumed a sort of equivalence between one form and other forms (for example, between two ‘styles’, between one in clothing and one in architecture, or in furniture)—the most convincing of these works on this subject is by hansen, which is cited at the start of this article—or between a form and the spirit of a particular time, the moral character of a period or the Zeitgeist of a civilization. none of these attempts ever really gets beyond the boundaries of tautology: a ‘style’ is arbitrarily inferred from an item of clothing, this style is then linked to other styles which are just as arbitrary and then, to finish, we are all impressed by the close relationship of the forms. We know, however, that a form does not signify anything in itself (unless we go back to a universal symbolism of a Freudian variety), for the good reason that forms are finite in number and meanings infinite: in any primary formal order, only the functions, and not the substances, can carry meaning. Consequently in any vestimentary system one is as unlikely to find a purely historical, semelfactive phenomenon as to find a purely anthropological, eternal one; both postulations have existed in the history of clothing: as much as certain writers have excelled at locating styles historically, others have gone to great efforts, with no less success, to bring vestimentary variations down to a few simple forms, tirelessly repeated by human history; for some people, the hennin [steeple headdress] expresses the gothic tower in a way which is in some sense irreversible, for others, what is significant about the history of clothing is that one can already see very modern bikinis on the frescoes at Pompeii.Through these hypotheses the idea of a true semiology of clothing is gradually emerging. We need to link clothing to something. But to what? and how? The historical trend has been followed, by and large, by the psychological trend. The term of reference here is no longer the spirit or style of a period, but the psyche of the person wearing the clothing: clothing is supposed to express a psychological depth. here there are two routes to take. The first is an already dated collection of work, and very modest in its pretensions because it mainly concerns questionnaires given to students at a few american universities. This work is all based on the psychology of motivation: the idea is to define and classify personal motives which encourage the purchase of an item of clothing. This research is barely distinguishable from the marketing polls carried out periodically by professional clothing companies: the role of advertising, the proximity of the shops, ‘fashion tips’ from friends, the effect of shop windows, etc., the hierarchy of qualities required of the item bought (durability, taste, degree of fashionability, comfort, etc.). It is quite clear that this is barely a psychology but at best a rudimentary psycho-sociology which can know nothing of the potential of phenomenological or psychoanalytical descriptions; the central notion in this psychology is self-expression, as if the fundamental function of clothing were to bring together and solidify the self confronted by a society wishing to swallow it up: it is possible that there is something specifically american about this interpretation. The second route in these psychologies of clothing is psychoan- alytical. For this I would first suggest Kiener’s recent book, even though it is more gestaltist than psychoanalytical in inspiration. Kiener attempts to link clothing to a kind of esprit of the human body, as if anatomical form were the basis of clothing across a series of links and of distances and the meaning of which varies with history. But, with the exception of proper psychopathological studies on transvestism, the classic work, in terms of a psychoanalysis of clothing, is by Flügel; indeed its classic status is based more on its breadth of information than on the sharpness of its analyses; it is a fairly eclectic work which uses traditional analytical concepts within a ‘psychological’ framework (the motives of modesty, protection and ornamentation); the symbolism proposed remains cursory and narrowly analogous (for example, starching is seen as a phallic symbol). Despite these limitations there is probably in Flügel the origins of two interesting hypotheses: firstly, that clothing is a compromise between the fear of, and the desire for, nudity, which would make clothing part of the very process of neurosis, that is both display and mask; perhaps intuitively here, we can see the dialectical nature of clothing, in which there seems to be an infinite and circular exchange from the wearer to the group and from the group to the wearer; a second interesting hypothesis in Flügel suggests that analytical censorship actually corresponds to the sociological notion of social control: in other words, clothing would seem to be less an index (or a symptom) but more a form of communication. So here we are, after this brief panorama of histories of clothing, encouraged to posit clothing in terms of meaning; thus a whole literature, with diverse inspirations and qualities, but across which clothing is already felt as a value-for, has led us to this point. however it was a structuralist, Trubetskoy, who was the first to posit openly the linguistic nature of clothing.In an incidental remark in his Principles of Phonology, Trubetskoy suggests applying the Saussurian distinction between langue and parole to clothing; like langue, clothing would be an institutional system, abstract and defined by its functions, and from which the individual wearer would draw their apparel, each time actualizing a normative virtuality. Trubetskoy adduced as a phenomenon of dressing (that is, parole) the individual dimensions of an item of clothing, its degree of wear and dirtiness, and as a phenomenon of dress (that is, langue) the difference, no matter how tiny, between the clothing of unmarried girls and that of married women in any society. I would suggest developing this opposition in the following way: dressing (parole) would include the individual dimensions of the clothing item, the degree of wear, of disorder or dirtiness, partial absences of items (buttons not done up, sleeves not rolled down, etc.), improvised clothes (ad hoc protection), the choice of colours (except those colours ritualized in mourning, marriage, tartans, uniforms), the incidental derivations of how an item is used, the wearer’s particular way of wearing clothes. Dress (langue), which is always abstract and only requiring a description that is either verbal or schematic, would include the ritualized forms, substances and colours, fixed uses, stereotyped modes, the tightly controlled distribution of accessories (buttons, pockets, etc.), obvious systems (‘ceremonial’ dress), the incongruences and incompatibilities of items, the controlled game of undergarments and overgarments, and finally those dress phenomena which are artificially reconstituted in order to signify (theatre and film costumes). I think that this application of the Saussurian distinction to clothing is very valuable; this application allows research into clothing to monitor constantly the institutional and sociological character of its object; and, using facts which seem at first to be ambiguous and drawing only confusedly on clothes and dressing and on the individual and society, it throws a clear light: it is because richardson and Kroeber defined the exact sense of the limits in which the proportions of a item of clothing stopped being a part of dressing and became part of dress, that they were able to establish, in a work well known to structuralists, the regularity in the rhythms of fashion evident for the last three centuries in women’s clothing. Finally, the Saussurian distinction allows us to describe with accuracy all the truly dialectical movements which govern the incessant exchanges between institutional clothing and clothing that is actually put on: how an outfit becomes clothes (in the general case of women’s fashion, diffused into clothing habits by real models); how clothes in their turn become part of outfits (in the case of individual usage becoming picked up collectively by imitation, fads and crazes, which are so frequent in dandyism).now that the distinction between clothing and dress has been ascertained, we must ask what actually signifies in dress. Dress is a priori a kind of text without end in which it is necessary to learn how to delimit the signifying units, and this is very difficult. Technology is of very little help here: a unit of manufacture or of purchase, in short what is called the article (a shirt, a skirt, a jacket), is not necessarily a signifying unit. Clearly meaning is not located in the finished object, it can be found in a tiny detail or in a complex outfit. Except in cases of flagrant eccentricity, the item signifies nothing. Furthermore, it has been a long time since our clothing represented any analogical link between signifier and signified except when we have recourse to a universal symbolism of the unconscious sort; one of the last analogies in our Western dress was in the middle ages when there was the particoloured outfit worn by madmen, a symbol of psychic division; since then, forms seem to have followed an evolution which is properly internal, removed from all symbolic reference (and this constitutes another of the lessons of the work of richardson and Kroeber). on the one hand we have the signifieds (for example: youthfulness, intellectualism, respectability, bohemianism, etc.) and on the other signifiers which are abstract, highly mobile, arbitrary forms, (and which we could even say are ‘an-iconic’), but without the link between the signifiers and the signifieds, that is the meaning, ever losing its normative, threatening, terroristic character.This probably means that the semiology of clothing is not lexical but syntactic. It is because meaning is neither motivated, nor coded, by an ancestral grammar in the way that clothing was in ancient oriental societies, that we are forced to look for clothing’s unit of meaning not in whole, isolated items, but in true functions, oppositions, distinctions and congruences. These are probably quite closely analogous to the units of phonology. So, as in phonology, we should submit the vestimentary continuum to a series of commutation tests, in order to isolate the units that really do hold meaning (the semes); to take a rather crude example, does putting leather buttons on a jacket give it a new meaning? It is likely that simple oppositions (leather buttons/other buttons) are only remotely meaningful; it is the ‘combinatory variants’, true functions of functions, which are able to achieve the status of being meaningful (for example: tweed/leather buttons/lighter-pocket, etc.). of course, the absence of elements can play a role which is meaningful (for example, not wearing a tie): the vestimentary sign can be expressed as the degree zero, it is never null. Conversely, we should learn to decipher the accumulation of signifiers: in the majority of outfits there is a redundancy of messages, the study of which could lead to a structural definition of taste. The inventory of the signifying elements of clothing posited here in a purely hypothetical way has never been undertaken by anybody. maybe the task is premature (we would need a vast information apparatus, if only in order to list all the vestimentary ‘texts’: observations, analyses, continual updatings, which could only be done by a team of researchers). maybe we should start with the crudest of analyses about which I would like to make a few observations. The major difficulty in the analytical deciphering of ‘everyday’ clothing is its syntactic nature: the signified is only ever expressed in this regard via signifiers ‘in operation’, meaning is an indissoluble whole that tends to evaporate as soon as one divides it up. now luckily, there is an artificial form of clothing in which the signifieds are separated a priori from the signifiers, and this is fashion clothing that is presented in both graphic and descriptive form in newspapers and magazines. here, the signified is given explicitly, even before the signifier is named (an autumn skirt, a woman’s suit for five o’clock in the afternoon, etc.); it is as if you were being given a very complex text to read, one made up of subtle norms but to which one had the good fortune at the same time to have the key: luckily, fashion that is written or drawn brings the semiologist back towards a lexical state of the vestimentary signs. We are probably talking about an elaborated language, a logo- technics, whose signifieds are largely unreal, the stuff of dreams. however, this does not matter, since what is being sought here is, first, a field which is sufficiently crude, sufficiently loaded, so that meaning is seen to be functioning in slow motion as it were, in its decomposed stages. a semiology of printed fashion must ensure that it is able to deal legitimately with the greatest danger threatening any semiology of the first degree: the unjustified objectification of the signifieds. on the contrary, with written fashion being a semiological system of the second degree it becomes not only legitimate, but even necessary, to separate the signified from the signifier and to give to the signified the very weight of an object. In other words, and to pick up on a definition that I outlined in a previous essay, printed fashion functions, semiologically speaking, like a true mythology of clothing: it is even because the vestimentary signified is here objectified, thickened, that fashion is mythic. So it is this mythology of clothing (one could also say its utopia) that needs to be the first stage of a vestimentary linguistics.
Towards a Sociology of Dress.I suggested in this journal that, if we exclude the numerous histories of clothes, the majority of which merely repeat each other, then works on clothing overall are rare; and since this is a vast subject, barely explored, and in which there is a permanent temptation towards futility, any serious attempt or claim to synthesize clothing is eagerly seized upon. There is no lack of such intentions in Fr. Kiener’s work. But I doubt whether this study provides anything really new for those who have read the work by Flügel which, despite (or, perhaps, because of) its bias, is unrivalled to this day.To understand Kiener’s tentativeness we have to remind ourselves of Flügel’s bias. Flügel located himself clearly within a psychoanalytical perspective; he has used the lexicon of Freudian symbols to describe human clothing as the ambiguous expression, both mask and advertisement, of the unconscious self. Even if we reject Freudian symbolism, his work remains doubly valuable: first, because he has brought together the essential elements of clothing phenomena, pulling them out of history, folklore, literature or contemporary society, in short putting order into what everyone more or less knows (for here there is a subtle difficulty for all work on clothing: how to give objective value to something which seems insignificant because it is experienced subjectively); second, because he has explicitly conceived clothing as a value-for, that is as a form of meaning (where the signified is the deep psyche); for the first time, clothing was now liberated from the triangle of motivations (protection, modesty, ornamentation) in which it had been locked, and reached the status of message, an element in a semiological system: in this sense, and in spite of his strict obedience to analysis, Flügel makes clothing much more into communication than expression.Like Flügel, Kiener begins by discussing the old motivations (protection, modesty, ornamentation), from which, rather eclectically, he retains certain elements. But his main point is to posit clothing as the expression of the body, from which he gleans the body’s successive modes of being; and this inclines him to organize the main parts of his book following a purely anatomical schema: head, trunk, pelvis, legs, etc., and then to consider, for each of these parts, all the diverse ‘motives’ for which men have covered themselves; his attempt is a bit like the great description of the French language by Damourette and Pichon: it has the same encyclopaedic aims, the same qualities (an abundance of data, finely detailed analyses), and the same faults (disorder beneath a semblance of order, continual confusion between synchrony and diachrony).It is this ‘naturalist’ postulate that leaves Kiener lagging behind in relation to Flügel. Certainly his material is substantial, gleaned from a wide variety of sources (myths, history, folklore, sayings, legends, jokes, dreams, anecdotes), all presented in a rather pell-mell fashion but in such a way that the analysis is constantly threatened with confusion and with banality, since everything is considered as a ‘detail’ whilst nothing is regarded as exemplary. But above all it is the principle of interpretation that is disappointing. Kiener is aiming towards a ‘psychology’ (but does not state which one). unfortunately, as Kiener gradually links the body and clothing, the psychology evaporates, as if in a conjuring trick. one may wish to contest the Freudian psychology that Flügel uses, but it does have the merit of being sufficiently structured so as to set up a fruitful working hypothesis. But by constantly drawing clothing back into a kind of ‘natural meaning’ emanating from the body, Kiener is, despite himself, forced into stating truisms; the majority of his analyses are veritable tautologies in which the body is the body rather like the way in which ancient graphology used to suggest that limp handwriting was indicative of a limp personality. To say for example that a short item of clothing is chosen because it is practical is of very little interest unless you then submit the notion of practical to a historical and ideological analysis that reveals the relative nature of such a term: for what is of interest is not the diversity of clothing items but the relativity of the values that they signify. There is in all this a sort of latent essentialism that cuts explanation short, with Kiener having recourse to a set of essences that remind you of the ‘soporific’ effects of opium (the essence of Woman, the ‘spirit of the times’, the ‘life instinct’, the ‘need for change’, the ‘slowing down in growth’, etc.).Certainly, nothing is simplistic in Kiener’s book; he has recognized, if not exploited, the possibilities of a phenomenological analysis of clothing, of what he calls the Kleider-Ich, the ‘me Clothing’ (even though his observations on the extension of the self and on vestimentary eroticism are already to be found largely in Flügel). Furthermore, his encyclopaedic sense and his thirst for tiny facts and contradictory details (and the history of clothing is indeed a series of ‘inversions’) give his work a kind of relativist dimension. But the price he pays is a contradiction which he resolves badly: on the one hand, he resorts constantly, but anarchically, to history (without, moreover, taking social distinctions sufficiently into account), to the extent that clothing, in its diachrony, becomes a monotonous series of ruptures, a disordered succession of opposites; and on the other, his plan, the very aim of his work, postulates a ‘natural’ anthropology, a kind of psychological essence of the human body, which, if it were true, would logically lead to a universal form of clothing, or at least to a very weak variation and not an absolute variation as is the case in our world: if the neck is a part of the body that must be protected, how is it that every form possible, from covering to revealing the neck, has existed? There is a contradiction here between history and ‘nature’, a hiatus between a strict finality of the organ and the diversity of clothing experiments, and the law of heterogony alone (which Kiener borrows from Wundt) is not adequate to explain it.all in all, what is valuable in this book is the detail: in order to have a historical and anthropological inventory of clothing phenomena there must be a lot of culture, supplied by very varied sources. many of Kiener’s analyses of items are not only brilliant but also exciting, encouraging us to think of problems which go far beyond the detail. unfortunately, what we really need in this subject are systematic attempts to consider clothing as a structure and not as an anarchic collection of tiny events. Furthermore I doubt whether the very notion of an item could withstand such structuration. For what interests us in items of clothing is essentially the links between them; what we need is a description that is more functional than substantial. now the example of linguistics (and especially phonology) suggests that we cannot describe a reality as a structure unless we modify the very idea of those phenomena that compete with each other to form a function: phonological ‘phenomena’ are very different from phonetic ‘phenomena’. The day when the study of clothing moves from, shall I say, the lexical to the syntactical, is the day when the majority of the ‘phenomena’ collected by the psychology of clothing will be useless because they will suddenly have no meaning.
Systems and Structures.
‘Blue is in Fashion This Year’: A Note on Research into Signifying Units in Fashion Clothing.When I read in a fashion magazine that the accessory makes springtime, that this women’s suit (of which I have a photograph in front of me) has a young and slinky look, or that blue is in fashion this year, I cannot but see a semantic structure in these suggestions: in every case, and whatever the metaphorical detours taken by the wording, I see imposed upon me a link of equivalence between a concept (spring, youth, fashion this year) and a form (the accessory, this suit, the colour blue), between a signified and a signifier.of course, we are not talking about a rigorous production of meaning: the link is neither obligatory nor sufficiently motivated. If it is suggested to me: for a teatime dance at Juan-les-Pins, a lavish, straight neckline, or for a lunchtime party in Deauville, a soft canezou, we have here a doubly feeble link—the teatime dance does not require such a neckline, nor the normandy lunch a canezou. nevertheless, there is an expressive affinity between the two terms in the link I make, the beginnings of a tautology: one term calls for the other, the link is like a quotation. at the very least I can see that there is meaning between them; it is almost as if the fashion magazine were linking a certain domain (a daytime party, the cool climate of normandy) with another (warm and light materials, enveloping and elegant forms), using the most elementary of signifying processes. I am not yet certain that clothing does carry meaning; but I am right at least to apply a linguistic method of analysis to it: it is this conformity of the method to its object that will prove to me the signifying nature of fashion clothing, rather than the consciousness of its wearers, which is to some extent an alienated one.For fashion-magazine rhetoric is actively engaged in hiding the semantic nature of the links that it proposes. Sometimes the rhetoric presents the signifieds (fashionability, slinkiness, springtime) as qualities inherent to the forms it proposes, suggesting that there is a kind of physical causality between fashion and the colour blue, between the accessory and spring. Elsewhere, the rhetoric reduces the signified to a simple utilitarian function (a coat for the journey). Whether causality or finality, the phrasing used in a fashion magazine always has a subtle tendency to transform the linguistic status of the clothing item into one of naturalness or usefulness, to invest an effect or a function in the sign; in both cases, it is all about changing an arbitrary link into a natural property or a technical affinity, in short providing fashion creations with the guarantee of being eternal or empirically necessary. The fashion magazine, it has to be said, never uses anything but sign-functions: the function can never be separated from its sign. a raincoat protects against rain, but also and indissociably, it points to its status as raincoat. This is moreover the fundamental status of clothes: an item of clothing that is purely functional is conceivable only outside of any notion of society—as soon as an item is actually manufactured, it inevitably becomes an element in semiology.The first task, then, is to reduce the phraseology of the fashion magazine (which does not mean that we will not later have to reinterpret it, and at that point in a mythological way). What becomes apparent then are the simple links, belonging to a single model (which allows us to collate), between signifieds and signifiers. These links are simple, but they are not pure; for the signifiers are always part of a physical world which is the clothing content, the fragment of bodily space occupied by the clothing item (a woman’s suit, a pleat, a clip brooch, gilt buttons, etc.); whereas the signifieds (romantic, nonchalant, cocktail party, countryside, skiing, feminine youth, etc.) are given to me necessarily via the written word, via a literature (that it is poor literature in no way changes its status). This amounts to saying that, once in their final state, the signifier and the signified of fashion clothing do not belong to the same language. This is a crucial distortion, which places fashion within those decoupled, dualized structures that I first tried to describe in a previous essay. now, the duplicity of the system, set up, as it were, as a halfway house between a language (clothing forms) and a meta-language (the literature of fashion), requires our method to apply a double description: the study of the signifieds (for example of the utopian world they sketch out) is part of a general mythology of fashion. Conversely, the study of the clothing signifiers belongs to a semiological system, in the strict sense of the word. I will leave to one side the former in order to concentrate on the latter; from the signifieds I will retain only their place in the sign.In the majority of other systems of communication, the signifying relation is not given analytically: the system proposes only a chain of signifiers, without naming in another way their signifieds: a discourse offers words, not the meaning of each of these words; if the decipherer of a language does not know this language and has no lexicon in it, he [sic] has to operate very patiently, by comparing segments in the spoken chain, by moving them around, even in an almost experimental fashion (the commutation test).With clothing, the autonomy of the signifieds, which are isolated, detached from the signifiers and hoisted to the dizzy heights of fashion literature, constitutes a considerable economy of method. Since its signifiers are given to me with one hand and then the signifieds with the other, it is as if I was being offered, simultaneously, a text and its glossary of words; all I will have to do (in theory) is start from the signs in order to define straightaway the signifiers: defining them is basically to isolate them. If I am told that blue is in fashion or that camellia has the optimistic look about it, I will come to the conclusion that colour and trimmings are apparently types of signifiers, signifying units.Then, all I need to do to understand the all-signifying structure of the clothes is look within each unit for those aspects whose opposition helps create meaning (blue/red? blue/white? brooch/flower? camellia/ rose?). We will recognize in this schema the two phases of structural analysis: an inventory of the signifying units, and for each unit the setting up of the paradigm of pertinent opposites; the (spatial) syntagmatic division on the one hand, and the construction of a system on the other. I will restrict myself to the first of these, and consider only the inventory that goes with the types of forms.obviously it is easier to bring into my inventory those links which are entirely verbalized, those links where the signifier is a commentary on the image and not the image itself, because in such links the signified and the signifier belong—at least in the practical sense—to the same language. unfortunately, the fashion magazine very often gives me links where the signifier is purely graphic (this nonchalant ladies’ suit, this elegant dress, the casual two-piece); I then do not have any way—unless intuitively—to decide just what in this suit, in this dress or in the two-piece signifies nonchalance, elegance or casualness: the demonstrative (this, the) refers here to a general form, and it is this that paradoxically stops me from having any analytical precision without which I cannot isolate the vestimentary sign.Confronted with these links—what we might call demonstrative links—I am a bit like a decipherer who has to uncover the signifying units of a continuous message; the only way here is to look for repetitions: it is by seeing a particular zone of the message coming back, identical to itself, that it can be seen to have the same meaning. Similarly for fashion clothing: it is by looking in a collection of photographs to see how a certain feature goes with the concept of nonchalance that I will finally be able to come to the conclusion that this feature signifies nonchalance—or at least be able to see what I am specially interested in at the moment—that is, whether it really is a unit of meaning.That’s one difficulty; here is another one. If I read that a square- necked, white silk sweater is very smart, it is impossible for me to say— without again having to revert to intuition—which of these four features (sweater, silk, white, square neck) act as signifiers for the concept smart: is it only one feature which carries the meaning, or conversely do non-signifying elements come together and suddenly create meaning as soon as they are combined? once again here, it will, in theory, be a patient study of the stable residues that will provide me with the answer; or else I will find out that silk, for example, is a material that is necessarily linked to smartness, or on the contrary that meaning appears only when, for example, a colour is combined with a material. Either way, it will be useful for me to note that the sweater, silk, white and the squareness of the neck can be signifying features; and also to foresee the existence of a fifth, sufficiently meaningful feature, which is the combination of these four.This example may also be more instructive to me: if by reading other messages I am persuaded that the sweater is very rarely the signifier of the concept smart and that the sweater most often imbues the opposite signified (sport, for example), I will conclude that the link suggested to me is deliberately paradoxical: a certain number of features (silk, white, square neck) proceed to undermine the normal meaning of the sweater. This is a phenomenon of regulation, which is very important in the grammar of fashion. But again what I want to hold on to for the moment is the idea that the sweater is not a signifier here: it is the object aimed at by meaning.In theory we must always be able to define the object that is aimed at in a fashion meaning. This is especially easy in the (fairly rare) cases where meaning acts, so to speak, from a distance, with the feature that carries the meaning being physically separated from the item aimed at. For example, in the following proposition: patterned blouses give the skirt a touch of romance, the signifier (patterned blouses) is perfectly unconnected with the object aimed at (the skirt). In the case of the white silk sweater, the distinction is already more difficult, since the signifiers are in some way incorporated into the item that they signify. In fact, most often the object of meaning is not even referred to; it is the ensemble, the outfit, the grooming, the person in the clothing: since the target is a general one, it is not made precise.The material element in the link moreover often confuses different functions. When I am told about a blazer ensemble for cool days, I am forced to see in the blazer ensemble both a signifier and the very object of signification. What’s more, this element has a hidden level: it is also the support for meaning. This is an important new notion. We can see it clearly in a (rare) example where the three ‘levels’ are completely detached from one another. Let’s say: a sports cardigan with the collar fastened. I have three distinct notions here: the object of meaning (this is the cardigan); the support for the meaning (this is the collar); and the signifier proper (this collar is fastened). The supports for meaning take up a lot of space in the fashion lexicon; sometimes, it is true, they are not defined (blue is in fashion); but most often, the magazine makes them clear; it has to do this in the numerous cases where meaning comes only from the level of ‘detail’ (a necklace, the shape of a neckline, the sleeve length, the styling detail, etc.). By definition, the detail is parasitical on the item: the item supports meaning without participating in it, whether it is by ‘presenting’ it, or by receiving it; the item of clothing is either the object or the support for meaning. Since the support for meaning is more often expressed than the object of meaning, it is the first that needs to be identified, noting meanwhile those rare cases where the support for meaning is different from the object aimed at.Theoretically speaking, what is a support for meaning? here we need to think back to language. Language, so it would seem generally, does not have any support for meaning: the word does not underpin the meaning, because it is the meaning; one cannot abstract the meaning of a word from the (sonorous or written) material which conveys it: it is precisely because structural linguistics has understood this constraint that it has been able to develop at all. however, there is an area where language begins to dualize discourse and transform the verbal chain into a simple support for meaning, an area which I have called elsewhere ‘writing’ [l’écriture]. In literary writing, for example, discourse does have a literal meaning, and in this sense it disallows any dissociation of the object from meaning, and it is a language in the full sense; but this same discourse supports a supplementary form of meaning which is not that of the words that it employs, and whose signified is precisely literature: by writing a poem I say certain things, but at the same time I point to poetry.It is roughly the same with fashion clothing, even though literal meaning here is defective in most cases: all that remains is the mythological meaning. In the language of clothing the support for meaning is to all intents and purposes a kind of sign in decline, the inert, domesticated vestige of a world where the sweater would literally signify comfort and warmth, in short the very opposite of smart. So it is because fashion clothing is part of a double, unhinged system, where supplementary, secondary meanings rest on initial meanings that are then slowly devitalized, that it involves these supports of meaning that do not exist in single-level semiological analyses.
a full link must supply me then with at least three pieces of information: a signifier, a signified and a support for the meaning. as these links are fairly numerous in fashion magazines, I can risk making a list of them which conforms to the following model:Signified:Five o’clockSupport for meaning (or object aimed at by it): A dressSignifier(s):SatinExpression of meaning (phraseology):‘To give an air of...’I can classify these data in two ways: by signifieds or by signifiers. This would be a difficult one to choose between if I was dealing with a vast corpus of materials, with statistical importance analogous to that of linguistics, for example. But since the list concerns models that are purely qualitative, it is not difficult for me to try and establish the two sets of classifications. The first will give me all the ‘morphemes’ of one single signified; I will find out, for example, that the signifiers for ‘romantic’ are: chiffon, lace, batiste, Swiss cotton, lawn, organza, flounces, hats with veils, headbands; here I am in the same situation as a linguist having to list all the different markers for the plural form (-s, their, etc.). But in the same way that the ‘s’ is both a marker of the number and of the person (she sings), so organza is the established signifier both for the romantic air and for the dress to wear to the casino. I am thus referred back to the context, be it a spatial one (the phrasing or the entire item of clothing) or an associative one (the oppositions between—‘s’ and no ‘s’, between, for example, organza and flannel).It would be better then to put the signifiers into homogenous classifications, without worrying for the moment about their substance, i.e. their signifieds: the signified will only come back into the picture with the setting out of the relevant variations within each of these classifications. What must be distinguished first are the main generic ‘morphemes’ of fashion clothing (for which I have reserved the middle box in my diagram): if I bring together all the signifiers of the type ‘satin’, I will quickly find a general ‘vesteme’: material, inside which I hope to open out, via a series of later studies, an actual paradigm (whose ‘number’ I cannot predict) which will contrast in a pertinent way satin with tweed (morning).For it is the functions that I am trying to highlight. now, often the fashion magazine only provides me with a univocal lexicon (what I will call an absolute lexicon), inasmuch as it tends, thanks to its mythological vocation, to present the signs as unchanging essences; the magazine will tell me, for example, that alpaca means summer or that lace means mystery, as if it were about ‘real’ eternal identities whatever the general spread of other possible meanings: the more arbitrary its law, the more imperative it is. But I would not be satisfied with an absolute lexicon that did not allow me to find the signifying oppositions. The stake is high, because if I am happy with simple equations (alpaca summer), I will be induced to make the meaning into a substance and to lose sight of the mythological aspect of the signified; whereas, if I manage to disperse fashion’s absolute lexicon across various ranges of relative oppositions, I am respecting the dualized structure in fashion language, sending the signified back to its mythological heaven.Fortunately, however, the fashion magazine sometimes abandons the absolute lexicon and itself provides various ranges of oppositions that are all ready set out for me. This is true of what I will call concomitant variations of signs: a change of signified explicitly brings about a change of signifier, so that I then have at least four terms (two signifieds and two signifiers), linked to each other by a kind of proportionality. Let us take the example of a velvet hat in oatmeal silk (the support for meaning); for wearing in the afternoon (signified no. 1) there are two straw cabochons on it (signifier no. 1); for the evening (signified no. 2) it has three jet buttons (signifier no. 2)Afternoon Cabochons Evening ButtonsVelvet hat in oatmeal silkfor...........................................normally, this variation applies to a contradictory opposition of signifieds (sensible/amusing); but it can also extend to a range of states (smart/very smart/less smart), of moments (lunch/dinner/cocktail party/five o’clock tea/ten o’clock supper), or of circumstances (grand ball/outdoor dance/private dance/dance at home). here we can see the signifier defining, very closely, a tiny variant of the signified; and we can see gradated signifieds (more or less smart) being accompanied by starkly discontinuous signifiers (dresses with or without their jacket).These links are precious because they show in one go the ‘vesteme’ and its paradigm, showing simultaneously the syntagmatic unit and the systematic opposition that the unit normally implicitly supports. Let’s say: a cardigan which is sporty or casual depending on whether the collar is open or fastened (the collar is the support for the meaning, the cardigan the object it is aimed at). not only am I assured immediately that there is a ‘vesteme’: the way of wearing an item of clothing (or, as an abbreviation, the wearing), but also I know that the paradigm implied by this ‘vesteme’ will include at least the opposition open/fastened.
We can make use of these concomitant variations of signs to remind ourselves again of the particular structure of fashion language, of how it resembles articulated language and how it differs from it: articulated language is a single system (unless we consider its stylistic aspects, its écritures), fashion clothing is a double system. I will now explain this difference by comparing each of them to a third semiological system, an extremely banal one, but which has the advantage of being either double or single as you wish.In one part of the highway code I find three signs: red, green, amber. If no one tells me what their respective meanings are, I will have to register the real responses to these mysterious stimuli a certain number of times in order to understand that red is ‘stop’, green is ‘go’ and amber is ‘get ready’: here we have a primary system, analogous to articulated language (the message is decoded only by experience). By contrast, if my driving instructor tells me explicitly that red means ‘stop’, then I have here a secondary system, with spoken language as the relay; however, if the instructor tells me nothing about the other signals (or only tells me later), I will be led to think that red is the natural, essential, eternal colour for ‘stop’; I will then be absorbing a private meaning artificially detached from any functional structure: this is the case of the absolute lexicon (alpaca  summer), which I said represented the normal form of vestimentary communication. But if my instructor explains to me that the three signifieds (stop, go, get ready) are functionally linked to three colours whose difference I only need to observe to understand the message, then I learn a system whose functional structure is finally crystal clear—though this system is also communicated by spoken language: for it will be of little importance (except for the physical reasons of visibility) that the signifying colours are red, green and amber it is purely in the play of their oppositions that I will read the information system offered to me: this is very much the case with my concomitant variations.I am now in a position to propose a first inventory of the homogenous types of clothing signifiers. Each of these types constitutes a kind of syntagmatic unit (what Saussure calls ‘concrete units’); they are spatial in nature, ‘sections’ of clothing. here is a first list of these types of ‘vesteme’:
material Colour motifItems(defined by their point of support) headneckShouldershipsShoulders–hips (one-piece items) handsFeetDetailsCollar Sleeves Pockets Waist vents Fastenings Pleats Edging Stitching TrimmingsWay of wearing association of elementsnaturally, each of these types raises problems, requires explanations. as it is a question here of only outlining a methodological itinerary, I will restrict myself to commenting upon two aspects of this inventory.I will insist again on the following, that these different types do not in any way come from a logical or intuitive consideration of women’s clothing. I have not tried to classify the different elements (or features) of this clothing according to the divisions that might be suggested to me by aesthetic, anatomical, technical, commercial, terminological or utilitarian principles: it is simply the signifying power of such and such a zone or accident of clothing which designates them as units, and it is the whole set of morphologically identical units that constitutes a formal type. So it follows that these types are at the same time very near to and a long way off the classification of clothing that common sense might imagine. very near because—and it is not pointless to restate this in a resolutely ‘formalist’ investigation—the meanings of (fashion) clothing are obviously linked—in a certain way—to a vestimentary practice, to the extent that one finds in clothing as a signifying ensemble the technical matrix to which it is subject (that such and such a stitching is a sign does not remove the instrumental function of stitching). and very far off, because an item of clothing (to take the current division of clothes into articles) does not sell according to what it signifies: there are no ‘signifiers’ on the shelves of large stores. We will get an idea of this ambiguity by considering the very general ‘vesteme’: the item (defined by its point of support). The item and the article do indeed belong to the same order: by definition they are discontinuous objects. But whereas commercial taxonomy distinguishes articles by the complex combination of different criteria (the position on the vertical axis and horizontal axis of the body, the utilitarian function, the shape of the yokes, the existence of a characteristic ‘detail’, etc.), for the item I do not need to retain that which makes it mean, that which contrasts it with other signifiers: whether by its very existence, or by such and such a detail. It follows then that signifying units are often either bigger or smaller than the commercial article: there can be meaning at the very general level, for example, of the item worn on the outside of the shoulder, be it a coat, cape, raincoat or suit jacket, or simply at the level of a tiny detail (to wear a collar turned up or not); conversely, an article (a jacket, a skirt) can be devoid of all meaning. The first task then for a reading of fashion clothing—also the most intractable, given the commercial nature of the only terminology we have at our disposal—is to break up the notion of article so as to get a grip on the semiogenic element in all its mobility.The second general comment I would like to add to the question of formal types is this: the ‘proof’ of the vesteme is that it necessarily sits astride two structural planes: that of the syntagm and that of the system. For, on the one hand, the vesteme is indeed a segment of the vestimentary chain, a concrete piece of space, the fragment in a continuum. on the other, if the vesteme occupies this space, it is because it has dislodged, so to speak, all the other concurrent features to which it stands in opposition. To return to the example of the shoulder item, in one way it is a fragment of vestimentary space, in line with the garment worn on the hips, in tune with the other items that have been chosen to be combined with it, to pick up the hjelmslev-Togeby classification; and all these links of commonality, selection or simple combination are purely syntagmatic: with the point of support and the ‘join’ in place there can be only one unit of meaning in this body-juncture. In another way, it is actually part of a type: the shoulder item; and here a whole paradigm opens up, in which each term has meaning only because it excludes the others. an anorak is a syntagmatic unit in that it links up with a hip item (skirt or trousers); and it is a systemic unit in that it is in opposition to another shoulder item, of a similar sort, such as the car coat. So the ‘vesteme’ always has a double existence: extensive, because it is provided with a concrete (topological) situation; intensive, because it sits at the top of a virtual paradigm of oppositions.The signs I have discussed so far all link to a specific signified: and this is even, I have suggested, to the advantage of fashion clothing in that it supplies its signifieds in the meta-language of a literature. These signifieds are not great in number, and the world they construct is narrow. however, even if we remember that a signified has almost always several signifiers, fashion clothing gives the impression of a surprising flourishing of forms. how can this be?here we need to consider a whole set of features for which the fashion magazine does not give the signified, or at least to which it does not attribute an explicit signified: the signified remains, so to speak, ‘up in the air’. For example, the simple overall dress will be described to us using a succession of its features (poplin with white polka dot on Pernod-yellow background, pleated collar and pockets, etc.), without these features referring to any declared concept: the signified seems to be defective. But this is only in appearance: in all of the cases where the magazine describes without commenting, of which there are many, there is always a signified which needs to be added, and this signified is fashion itself; to the extent that these apparently defective equations are full meanings: nothing of what is said is insignificant.Fashion then is a signified like all the others. The only difference is that the other signifieds are episodic and always named. The signified fashion is by contrast permanent—it can be found in three forms: explicitly named (blue is in fashion this year); supported by contingent signifieds which make up its links (accessory spring { fashion}); or neither named, nor linked, but implicit (a dress in Pernod poplin, etc.). It is a universal signified; one could say, to borrow the expression from logic, that in all equations of vestimentary language, whether implicit or not, fashion constitutes the vector continuum of meaning.It follows then, that in literary terms, it is within this written meta- language that the fashion magazine supplies its equivalences, and that the signified fashion is supplied using a single signifier, which, both necessary and sufficient, I will call the notable: any noted feature, any underlined form, in short any vestimentary fragment points, as soon as it is cited, to the signified fashion. Therefore I can—and I must—treat all that is said by the fashion magazine as a virtual feature of meaning, and make these notations into signifying material and incorporate them into my formal types: moreover they sit here very well, and the list of pure fashion signifiers will coincide pretty closely with the list of more specific signifiers. In this way we are sure of a very wide yet homogenous inventory.Can this inventory (of signifying forms) be exhaustive? It is necessary first to remember that, since the object of this research is purely synchronic, we must have collected only those features and forms found during one year. Furthermore, what is listed are models, not averages; as soon as a feature is recorded, it is no longer necessary to count the number of times it appears: a regular feature is no more meaningful than a rare one; it is not the size of a particular fashion form that allows it to carry meaning, but its relation to other forms.It follows then, that after a while the inventory of signifying forms will be saturated; in practical terms it never is completely; but if the general structure is established correctly, a form, whatever it is, is never unforeseeable. It is certainly still possible to find a new sign; but if the formal types are well established, it will be incorporated into one or several of these without any friction.For the ‘renewal’ of fashion is linked essentially to the apparent novelty of combinations, and not to the novelty of features. ‘vestemes’ are finite (and probably small) in number, and so the total number of their combinations is also; and this total number is even smaller, because certain combinations are impossible by virtue of certain rules of incompatibility. Indeed, the abundance of forms, upon which the whole mythology of fashion is constructed (‘caprice’, ‘taste’, ‘invention’, ‘intuition’, ‘inexhaustible renewal’, etc.), is an illusion, which is possible only because, with the synchrony here being very short, the play of combinations easily goes beyond, if only by a little, any human memory of these forms. But all that would be needed would be to build a mathematical memory (as a machine for making fashion), for fashion to appear, even at the level of a micro-diachrony, to be a limited and essentially computable set of forms: this is a shocking truth for a commerce based entirely on the exaltation of incessant newness, but useful precisely for an understanding of how an ideology turns the real inside out.
From Gemstones to Jewellery.For a long time, for centuries, perhaps even millennia, the gemstone was considered to be essentially a mineral substance; whether it was diamond or metal, precious stone or gold, it always came from the earth’s depths, from that sombre and fiery core, of which we see only the hardened and cooled products; in short, by its very origin, the gemstone was an infernal object that had come through arduous, often bloody journeys, to leave behind those subterranean caverns where humanity’s mythic imagination stored its dead, its damned and its treasures in the same place.Extracted from hell, the gemstone came to symbolize hell, and took on its fundamental characteristic: the inhuman. Like stone (and stones provided a large amount of gems), it was associated above all with hardness: stone has always stood for the very essence of things, for the irremediably inanimate object; stone is neither life nor death, it represents the inert, the stubbornness of the thing to be nothing but itself; it is the infinitely unchanging. It follows then, that stone is pitiless; whereas fire is cruel, and water crafty, stone is the despair of that which has never lived and will never do so, of that which obstinately resists all forms of life. Through the ages the gemstone extracted from its mineral origins its primary symbolic power: that of announcing an order as inflexible as that of things.nevertheless, humanity’s poetic imagination was able to conceive of stones that were made to wear out, noble, venerable stones, which grew old and so were, despite everything, alive. as for the quintessential stone, the diamond, it is beyond time: never wearing, incorruptible, its limpidness forms the moral image of the most deadly of virtues—purity; in terms of substance, the diamond is pure, clean, almost aseptic; but whereas there are some purities that are tender, fragile (water for example), there are others that are sterile, cold, steely; for purity is life, but it can also be, by contrast, infertility, and the diamond is like the sterile son emerging from the deepest point of the earth, non-productive, incapable of rotting down, hence incapable of becoming the source of new life.and yet, it seduces; hard and limpid, the diamond has a third symbolic quality: it glistens. here it is incorporated into a new magical and poetic domain, that of the paradoxical substance, both lit up and stone cold: it is nothing but fire and yet nothing but ice. This cold fire, this sharp, shining object which is nevertheless silent, what a symbol for the whole world of vanities, of seductions devoid of content, of pleasures devoid of sincerity! For centuries, Christian humanity felt deeply (much more than we do today) the opposition between the world and solitude; thanks to its fire-like sparkle and its coldness, the diamond was this world, this abhorrent and fascinating order of ambition, flattery and disappointment, condemned by so many of our moralists—perhaps in order better to describe it.and what about gold, which was also used to make gemstones? Though originating in the earth and in hell, arriving first as ore or as nugget, gold is a substance more intellectual than symbolic; it holds a fascination only within certain mercantile economies; it has no, or very little, poetic reality; it is only ever mentioned so as to show how this most mediocre of substances (a dull, yellowy metal) clashes with the importance of its effects. But as a sign, what power it has! and it is precisely the sign par excellence, the sign of all the signs; it is absolute value, invested with all powers including those once held by magic: is it not able to appropriate everything, goods and virtues, lives and bodies? Is it not able to convert everything into its opposite, to lower and to elevate, to demean and to glorify? The gemstone has long participated in this power of gold. and this is not all: owing to the fact that gold very quickly stopped being convertible or useful and so removed itself from any practical application, pure gold, whose usefulness was almost entirely self-referential, became superlative gold, absolute richness—here the gemstone becomes the very concept of price; it is worn like an idea, that of a terrific power, for it is enough to be seen for this power to be demonstrated.There is no doubt that, fundamentally, the gemstone was a sign of superpower, that is of virility, and remained so for a very long time (after all, it is only recently and under the puritan influence of Quaker clothing, which is the origin of men’s clothing today, that men stopped wearing gemstones). So why in our world has it been associated so constantly with woman, with her powers and her evil spells? It is because the husband very quickly delegated to his wife the job of showing off his own wealth (certain sociologists use this to explain the origins of fashion): the wife provides poetic proof of the wealth and power of the husband. Except that, as always with human society, a simple pattern is quickly invested with unexpected meanings, symbols and effects. Thus the primitive showing-off of wealth has been invaded by a whole mythology of woman: this mythology remains infernal, because woman would give everything to own gemstones, and man would give everything to own that very woman who wears the gemstones that she has sold herself for; with gemstones as the link, woman gives herself up to the Devil, the husband to the woman, who has herself become a precious, hard stone; and we must not assume that a symbolism of this sort, which is both prosaic, spiritual and, after all, naive, belongs only to the barbarous periods in Western history. The whole of the Second Empire in France (1852–71) for example was intoxicated and panic-stricken by the power of gemstones, by this capacity to induce human Evil, which for so long had been almost a physical property of diamond and gold: Zola’s Nana really is the grandiose and angry cry of a society destroying itself, or one might even say devouring itself, in two ways; woman is both a man- eater and a diamond-eater.Such a mythology has not completely disappeared from our times: there are still fine jewellers, a world market in diamonds and thefts of famous gemstones. But their infernal aspect is clearly on the decline. First, because the mythology of woman has changed: in the novel, in films, woman is less and less the femme fatale, no longer the destroyer of men; she can no longer be essentialized, stopped from existing or made into a precious and dangerous object; she has rejoined the human race. and also gemstones, the great mythical gemstones, are barely worn nowadays; they are of historical value only, sterilized, embalmed and kept away from the female body, condemned to sit in a safe. In short, fashion—need I say more?—no longer speaks of the gemstone but only of jewellery.now fashion, as we know, is a language: through it, through the system of signs it sets up, no matter how fragile this may seem, our society—and not just that of women—exhibits, communicates its being, says what it thinks of the world; so, just as the gemstone basically expressed the essentially theological nature of ancient society, so jewellery today, as seen in shops and in fashion magazines, merely follows, expresses and signifies our times—having originated in the ancestral world of the damned, the piece of jewellery has in one word become secularized.First and foremost this secularization has visibly affected the very substance of jewellery; it is no longer made from just stone or metal, but also fragile or soft materials such as glass or wood. Furthermore, jewellery is no longer routinely given the job of showing off a prize that is, so to speak, inhuman: you see jewellery made of common metal, of inexpensive glass; and when jewellery imitates some precious substance, gold or pearls, it is shameless; the copy, now a characteristic of capitalist civilization, is no longer a hypocritical way of being rich on the cheap—it is quite open about itself, makes no attempt to deceive, only retaining the aesthetic qualities of the material it is imitating. In short, there has been a widespread liberation of jewellery; its definition is widening, it is now an object that is free, if one can say this, from prejudice: multiform, multi-substance, to be used in an infinite variety of ways, it is now no longer subservient to the law of the highest price nor to that of being used in only one way, such as for a party or sacred occasion: jewellery has become democratic.of course, this democratization does not escape from new ways of conferring value. as long as wealth regulated the rarity of a gemstone, the latter could be judged by nothing but its price (that of its substance and of the work put into it); but once just about anyone could procure whatever they wanted, as soon as the work of art became a product, there had to be a way, in our democratic, but still differentiated, societies, of subjecting jewellery to another form of discrimination: and this is taste, of which fashion is precisely the judge and the keeper. So today we have jewellery of bad taste; and, rather paradoxically, what defines bad taste in a piece of jewellery is curiously that which was once the very sign of its prestige and of its magical qualities: namely its highest price; not only is jewellery that is too rich or too heavy now discredited but conversely, for expensive jewellery to have good taste, its richness must be discreet, sober, visible certainly but only to those in the know.So what counts as good taste in jewellery today? Quite simply this: no matter how little it costs, the piece of jewellery must be thought about in relation to the whole outfit it accompanies, it must be subjected to that essentially functional value which is that of style. What is new, if you like, is that the piece of jewellery is no longer on its own; it is one term in a set of links that goes from the body to clothing, to the accessory and includes the circumstances for which the whole outfit is being worn; it is part of an ensemble, and this ensemble is no longer necessarily ceremonial: taste can be everywhere, at work, in the country, in the morning, in winter, and the piece of jewellery follows suit; it is no longer a singular, dazzling, magical object, conceived as a way of ornamenting and thus making woman look her best; it is now more humble and more active, an element of clothing which enters into an equal relationship with a material, with a particular cut or with another accessory.So it is precisely its smallness, its finished look, its very substance as the opposite of the fluidity of fabrics, that makes the piece of jewellery part of fashion and it has become almost like the soul in the general economy of clothing: that is, the detail. It was inevitable that, in making taste into the product of a subtle set of functions, fashion would give more and more weight to the simple presence of one element, no matter how small and without regard for its physical importance; this gives rise to the highest value in today’s fashion being placed on anything insignificant in size but which is able to modify, harmonize, animate the structure of a set of clothes, and it is called precisely (but from now on with a lot of respect) a next-to-nothing. The piece of jewellery is a next- to-nothing, but out of this next-to-nothing comes great energy. often inexpensive, sold in simple ‘boutiques’ and no longer in the temples of jeweller’s shops, available in a variety of materials, free in its styles (often including the exotic even), in short depreciated in the true sense of the word, in its physical state, the most modest piece of jewellery remains the vital element in getting dressed, because it underlines the desire for order, for composition, for intelligence. analogous to those half-chemical, half-magical, substances which act all the more forcefully by virtue of their infinitesimal size, the piece of jewellery reigns over clothing not because it is absolutely precious but because it plays a crucial role in making clothing mean something. It is the meaning in a style which now becomes precious and this meaning depends, not on each element, but on the link between them and in this link it is the detached term (a pocket, a flower, a scarf, a piece of jewellery) that holds the ultimate power of signification. This is a truth that is not only analytical but also poetic: this great journey across centuries and across societies, from the gemstone to jewellery, is the very same itinerary that has transformed the cold and luxurious stones in the Baudelairian universe into those trinkets, pieces of jewellery and next-to-nothings in which mallarmé could then enclose a whole metaphysics of the new power of man to make the tiniest of things have meaning.
Dandyism and Fashion.For centuries there were as many clothing items as there were social classes. Every social condition had its garment and there was no embarrassment in making an outfit into a veritable sign, since the gap between the classes was itself considered to be natural. So, on the one hand, clothing was subject to an entirely conventional code, but on the other, this code referred to a natural order, or even better to a divine order. To change clothes was to change both one’s being and one’s social class, since they were part and parcel of the same thing. So we see in marivaux’s plays, for example, the game of love getting caught in mix-ups over identities, in the possible permutations of social standing and in the swapping of clothes. There was at this time a true grammar of clothing, something that was not simply a question of taste, and which one could not transgress without affecting the deeper organization of the world: how many plots and intrigues in our classical literature rely on the clearly signalled characteristics of clothing!We know that in the aftermath of the French revolution men’s clothing changed drastically, not only in its form (which came essentially from the Quaker model), but also in its spirit: the idea of democracy produced a form of clothing which was, in theory, uniform, no longer subject to the stated requirements of appearances but to those of work and equality. modern clothing (for our men’s clothing is largely that of the nineteenth century) is, in theory, both practical and dignified: it has to be adaptable to any work situation (provided that it is not manual work); and with its austere, or at least sober, form, it must signal that moral cant which characterized the bourgeoisie of the last century. In fact, the separation of the social classes was not abolished at all: though defeated politically, the aristocrat still maintained a powerful prestige, albeit one limited to lifestyle; and the bourgeois man also had to defend himself, not against the worker (whose clothing remained clearly marked), but against the rise of the middle classes. So clothing had to cheat, as it were, the theoretical uniformity that the revolution and Empire had bequeathed it; and within a universal type of clothing, there was now a need to maintain a certain number of formal differences which could exhibit the difference between social classes.It is here that we see the appearance of a new aesthetic category in clothing, destined for a long future (women’s clothing today is very fond of this, as a cursory glance in any fashion magazine will show): the detail. Since it was no longer possible to change the basic type of clothing for men without affecting the democratic and work ethos, it was the detail (the ‘next-to-nothing’, the ‘je ne sais quoi’, the ‘manner’, etc.) which started to play the distinguishing role in clothing: the knot on a cravat, the material of a shirt, the buttons on a waistcoat, the buckle on a shoe, were from then on enough to highlight the narrowest of social differences. at the same time, the superiority of status, which for democratic reasons could no longer be advertised, was hidden and sublimated beneath a new value: taste, or better still, as the word is appropriately ambiguous, distinction.a distinguished man is a man who marks himself off from the crowd using modest means, but it is a means whose power, which is a kind of energy, is immense. Since, on the one hand, his aim is to be recognized only by his peers, and on the other, this recognition relies essentially on details, the distinguished man adds to the uniform of his century a number of discreet signs (that is, those that are both barely visible and yet not in keeping with the outfit), which are no longer spectacular signs of a condition that is openly adopted but the simple signs of a tacit agreement. Indeed, distinction takes the signalling aspect of clothes down a semi-clandestine path: for, on the one hand, the group that reads its signs is a limited one, on the other the signs necessary for this reading are rare and, without a particular knowledge of the new vestimentary language, perceptible only with difficulty.The dandy (and we are talking only about his clothing, as we know that dandyism is more than simply vestimentary behaviour) is a man who has decided to radicalize the distinction in men’s clothing by subjecting it to an absolute logic. Furthermore, he takes distinction that bit further: its essence is no longer social for him, but metaphysical; the dandy stands in opposition not at all to the upper class and the lower class, but only in absolute terms to the individual and the banal; so the individual is not a generalized idea for him; it is him alone, purified of all recourse to comparison, to the extent even that, like narcissus, it is to himself and him alone that he offers a reading of his clothing. Furthermore he professes that its essence, like that of the gods, can be fully present in what is the slightest of elements: the vestimentary ‘detail’ is no longer a concrete object here, no matter how minute; it is a way, often subtly indirect, of destroying or ‘deforming’ clothing, of removing it from all sense of value as soon as a value becomes a shared one; it involves making the valet wear a new outfit, making his gloves wet so that they fit the shape of the hand perfectly, all forms of behaviour which bear witness to the profoundly creative, and no longer simply selective, idea that the effects of a form have to be thought through, that clothing is not simply an object to be used but is a prepared object.Dandyism therefore is not only an ethos (on which much has been written since Baudelaire and Barbey) but also a technique. It is these two together which make a dandy, and it is obviously the latter which guarantees the former, as with all ascetic philosophies (of the hindu type, for example) in which a physical form of behaviour acts as a route towards the performance of thought; and since this thought consists here of an absolutely singular vision of self, the dandy is condemned to invent continually distinctive traits that are ever novel: sometimes he relies on wealth to distance himself from the poor, other times he wants his clothes to look worn out to distance himself from the rich—this is precisely the job of the ‘detail’ which is to allow the dandy to escape the masses and never to be engulfed by them; his singularity is absolute in essence, but limited in substance, as he must never fall into eccentricity, for that is an eminently copyable form.The ‘detail’ allowed his clothing, in theory, to become indefinitely ‘other’. In fact, the ways of wearing an item of clothing are very limited and if certain details in manufacture do not intervene, any renewal of an outfit is quickly exhausted. This is what happened when men’s clothing was fully industrialized: deprived of any artisanal manufacture, the dandy had to give up on any absolutely singular form of clothing, for as soon as a form is standardized, even with luxury clothing, it can no longer ever be unique. So ready-to-wear clothing was the first fatal setback for dandyism. But, more subtly, what ruined dandyism for good, was the birth of ‘original’ boutiques; these boutiques sold clothes and accessories which were not part of mass culture; but because this exclusivity was part of commerce, albeit within the luxury sector, it became itself normative: by buying a shirt, a tie or cufflinks at X or at Z, one was conforming to a certain style, and abdicating all personal (one might say narcissistic) invention of singularity. however, it was fundamental to dandyism to be creative, the dandy would conceive his outfit exactly like a modern artist might conceive a composition using available materials (such as pieces of paper stuck together); that is, it was normally impossible for a dandy to purchase his clothes. But once limited to the freedom to buy (but not to create), dandyism could not but suffocate and die; buying the latest Italian shoes or English tweed is now a very common thing to do in that it is a conformity to Fashion.Indeed, Fashion is the collective imitation of regular novelty; even when it has the alibi of individual expression, or, as we say today, of a ‘personality’, it is essentially a mass phenomenon in which sociologists are very happy to be interested so long as they find in it the privileged example of a completely pure dialectic between the individual and society. Furthermore, Fashion has today become everybody’s business as shown by the extraordinary growth of women’s publications specializing in this area. Fashion is an institution and today nobody believes any more that it distinguishes; only unfashionable is a notion of distinction; in other words, in terms of the masses Fashion is only ever perceived via its opposite: Fashion is health, it is a moral code of which the unfashionable is nothing but illness or perversion.So we have witnessed the following paradox: Fashion has exterminated all considered singularity in clothing by tyrannically appropriating its institutional singularity. It is not the clothing item itself which has become bureaucratized (for example in societies without fashion), but more subtly its aim towards singularity. To inoculate all of contemporary clothing, via Fashion, with a bit of dandyism was always going to kill dandyism itself since, in its very essence, dandyism was condemned to be radical or not exist at all. It is not therefore the general socialization of the world which has killed dandyism (as one might imagine in a society with rigorously uniform clothing, such as Chinese society today); it was the intervention of an intermediary power between the absolute individual and the total mass of society: Fashion has in some way been given the job of making more subtle and of neutralizing dandyism; modern democratic society has made fashion into a sort of cross-subsidizing organism, destined to establish an automatic equilibrium between the demand for singularity and the right for all to have it. There is clearly a contradiction in terms here: society has made fashion viable only by subjecting vestimentary innovation to a strictly regular duration, slow enough for one to be able to be subject to it, but fast enough to initiate buying rhythms and to establish a distinction of fortunes between men.It seems that, for women’s clothing, the high number of elements (we might say units) of which fashion is made up still allows for a rich set of possible combinations and consequently for an authentic individuation of an outfit. But we have seen, without talking about the psychological traits (probably narcissistic and homosexual) which have made dandyism into an essentially masculine phenomenon, that dandy clothing was possible only during this historically ephemeral period when clothing was uniform in its type and variable in its details. Though slower and less radical than women’s fashion, men’s does none the less exhaust the variation in details, yet without, for many years, touching any aspect of the fundamental type of clothing: so Fashion, then, deprives dandyism of both its limits and its main source of inspiration—it really is Fashion that has killed dandyism.PrefaceThe object of this study is not a sociology, or a psychology, nor an aesthetics, and even less so a philosophy of Fashion; but something, unfortunately, much drier; for the aim here is above all methodological. What we wanted expressly to do here was to apply the analytical procedures of structural linguistics to a non-linguistic object, Fashion clothing, and thereby reconstitute the formal system of meaning which humans elaborate using this object; in short, if a little approximate, to establish a ‘grammar’ of Fashion. In other words, this work can be defined as an attempt at applied semiology.Fifty years ago, in his Course on General Linguistics, Saussure postulated the birth and the development of a general science of signs, which he called Semiology, of which linguistics was to be but a part, albeit an exemplary one. Initially taken up here and there in the work of Saussurian-influenced structural linguistics, the semiological project has very recently enjoyed a much wider currency from the moment when a whole series of different research activities, which had commenced independently, all matured at the same time and converged towards a new epistemological complex, consisting of information theory, formal logic and linguistics, and concerned with the analysis of systems of meaning. It is still far too early to write the history of this new current; many filiations can be found in it that probably go beyond Saussure himself, not to mention those orthogenetic phenomena which show that the same idea can appear at the same time in different authors. however, it is when a methodological intention mushrooms outside its original idea that its unifying principle is revealed: by treating a set of ethnological objects persistently in terms of meaning (kinship relations, myths, totemic representations), Cl. Lévi-Strauss has opened up the social sciences to the idea of semiology (often confused with the idea of structural analysis thanks to Saussurian linguistics); and if the investigations of Jean-Claude Gardin and those of Lacan remain rather specialized in the former’s drawing up of inventories and in the latter’s being deliberately ambiguous, they are nonetheless (to limit ourselves to the French domain) a part of semiology’s currency in the way in which they link the human psyche and a large part of world memory to this new science of signs. The present work is undoubtedly aiming quite deliberately to be part of this movement; but, compared to the intensity of the work being undertaken in this area at the moment, our work may appear to be lagging somewhat. First, because our work had already started about seven years ago (though unfortunately this delay does not explain the precarious nature of the results presented here), and because the very principle of this study required a logical rather than a syncretic impetus and was not primarily concerned with the development of semiological theory. and most importantly because we wanted continually to return this study to its primary objective, which was to apply the semiological analysis postulated by Saussure to a non- linguistic object, Fashion clothing; this explains why we had to refrain from taking part in the semiological debate, for example by arguing for semiology’s pertinence on the one hand, and for that of the social sciences on the other (not to mention that of marxism, psychoanalysis and phenomenology), but also why we wanted obstinately and narrowly to consider methodically, step by step and in a literal fashion, a particular method of analysis and a particular object. In short, this book [The Fashion System] is an exercise, and thus only indirectly part of semiology’s current usage (which is actually somewhat Borgesian in the manner in which semiological discourse is infinite whilst its object infinitely delayed); so one should not expect to find any more or less of a link here between this work and the current close reflections on semiology than, say, between a collection of musical scales and the theory of tonality. on the other hand, however, inasmuch as it is— arguably—linked to structuralism, semiology is nevertheless far from being a recognized (or even known) science and how could it be, since it does not exist? The lateness with which our work here is appearing cannot fail to be augmented paradoxically by an esoteric element: that is both its banality and its provocative nature, such is the uncomfortable situation in relation to the historical moment in which this work finds itself.Like all objects, fashion clothing (that is, women’s clothes as de- scribed by Fashion every year in its specialist publications) can be studied from several points of view. We can analyse the way in which the clothing is manufactured (technology), launched on to the market (economics), or disseminated into real society (sociology); we can reconstruct its history, its aesthetics or its psychology. none of these points of view is exclusive but each requires a particular method in the sense that each analysis retains only certain aspects of Fashion clothing, depending on what the initial aim is: the technician will see in fashion clothing only what has brought about its fabrication; the economist prices, the sociologist the clothing models, the historian how things have changed, the aesthetician the forms, the psychologist attitudes; and it is by starting from these chosen traits that each analysis will be built; in other words, each one isolates in the object of study ‘a homogenous level of description’ dependent on the set of aspects which are of interest to the point of view adopted, which means of course that the rest are wilfully discarded. This choice— augmented necessarily by an act of rejection—is called pertinence by linguists; ‘pertinent’ means all those traits of the object that can be apprehended by the point of view which the analyst has decided to adopt. The pertinence principle, well formulated by andré martinet but whose epistemological importance is yet to be measured, dominates entirely (at least it is hoped) the work presented here; confronted with fashion clothing we have chosen, from the outset, ‘an homogenous level of description’, to which we have tried to hold as rigorously as possible; the pertinence chosen is that of semantics; we have decided to look at contemporary Fashion clothing from the point of view of the meanings that society attributes to it, to the exclusion of all other points of view.Pertinence is at first glance a costly operation since the analysis which accompanies it has to exclude from the phenomenon studied a large number of factors which seem quite reasonably to be crucial parts of it: for example, we are taking Fashion here as if this institution, whose signifying element alone we are considering, lived free of charge amongst humans and without any economic, sociological, or historical basis. Everyone knows however that the Fashion phenomenon is linked to a certain economic gap within societies, characterized generally by the need to sell an object (clothing) at a rate which is faster than its wearing out; and that in the renewal of Fashion models, in their organization and dissemination, there intervene elements for which psychosociology alone can account; and, if the contents of Fashion cannot be directly attached to the contents of history at the level of event, as Kroeber and richardson have shown, then the phenomenon itself could not be explained except by recourse to a specifically historical, mental category: there is a definite link between Fashion and history at the structural level. By overlooking these categorically fundamental determinations (and considered fundamental especially today), semantic pertinence seems to be undermining the most arrogant of explanatory principles in contemporary social sciences: the principle of totality.however, it appears that in applied research the totality principle has a fairly low level of payback; either it remains theoretical (as in the sociology of G. Gurvitch) or else, whilst claiming a totality, research in fact is beholden to a particular pertinence (socioeconomic, phenomenological or psychoanalytical); and so the desire to exorcise the myth of determinism in recent years has been a very pious one. So it is better then not to set totality directly in opposition to the pertinence principle and to let this principle develop freely with all these consequences: perhaps then we will see that it is less costly than one thought and that it has a better chance of returning, in its own way, to the totality of a phenomenon than if it performed its analysis, in however voluntary a way, from a single point of view. Whilst accepting to coexist with other pertinences, semiology (for that is the particular pertinence under discussion here) does not aim to be a partial form of analysis; in its own way it tends towards a certain norm of totality. on the one hand, it tries to include the largest section possible of the real in its description; although by being systematic it cannot be exhaustive, because every system is in its way total, it nevertheless tends ceaselessly to recover a real which is called something different by other pertinences; for example, aesthetic notions like taste or elegance can have their semiological equivalent. on the other hand, it always forces itself to highlight the points in its own system where it uses other pertinences and it actively recognizes the points of crossover and defection in its object of study; whilst working on meaning, it is part of its project to indicate, for example, where meaning ends and where economy, art and the psyche begin. Furthermore, though we have not allowed ourselves to step outside semantic pertinence and as a consequence we should not expect to discover any ‘idea’ on the philosophy of clothes in this research, we have nevertheless been constantly mindful to point out, as we go along, that there are moments in semiological analysis when we could insert and develop analyses that work with a different pertinence: the semiology of Fashion necessarily contains a certain number of ‘doors’ leading, for example, to a sociology or a psychology of clothing; and whilst we have stopped ourselves going through these doors, we have made sure that they are pointed out—in the same way that phonology, though constituting a closed pertinence, recognizes the (physical) reality of those articulated sounds that it studies only from the point of view of meaning. are we talking about an epistemological liberalism here? not exactly: neither totalizing, nor partial, semiology can handle this contradiction quite naturally, in that it is nothing but a language, merely a particular way of talking about Fashion clothing. on the one hand, semiology sees itself as a complete language, sufficiently wide so as to be coherent (so it is not an analysis of little bits), but on the other it is happy for other languages to work on the same object (so it is not a dogmatic analysis); this double attitude in fact depends on the idea that Science is never completely the pure real nor pure language. as language, semiological pertinence has to be exhaustive (inasmuch as every system is exhaustive); but as the real, the object that it focuses on escapes from it at a certain moment to go towards other languages (which of course do not have a monopoly on totality any more than it does). In other words, the pertinence principle appears inevitable from the moment when we refuse to conflate, in absolute terms, language and the real and when we see that the link which unites the one to the other is one of validity and not one of truth. The application of pertinence then has nothing to do with scientistic ‘rigour’ (with carefully delimiting the object in order to study it in all ‘modesty’ and ‘objectivity’), but corresponds rather to a reaction against a certain positivism in the social sciences, when they refuse to recognize in their analyses of the real the distant nature of their own language, no matter how ‘banal’.Furthermore (and this is its second advantage) the pertinence principle, though a guide for focused work on a very specific object, allows for a better knowledge of the whole set of processes of meaning. Certainly these processes are now well elucidated in terms of articulated language. But what about the other systems, made up of objects whose original existence is not that of signification, but to which the social human being (that belonging precisely to sociology) gives new meanings? What happens within a collection of objects, when humans decide to give it the task of transmitting meaning? how does the collection become system (outside which there could be no communication)? how does meaning come to humans? This question, which defines semiology, needs two replies, one intensive, the other extensive. With regard to the former, we need on the one hand to tackle once and for all that very structure of an object that is independent of language, and it is contemporariness itself which requires this: these days there is a constant use made of the concepts of meaning which are applied to all sorts of objects and phenomena; be it concessions to fashion in vocabulary, or recourse to a new word which is aimed at replacing nominally the old determinist schema, there is nothing today, from the cinema to the machine, which is not deemed ‘language’. however, calling these phenomena ‘language’ is still to remain purely at the level of metaphor; for what makes something language is not the expression of a certain immateriality by a certain materiality but the existence of a differential system of discontinuous units; this is to the extent that, for each of the phenomena considered, no one has been able to establish an exhaustive system and thus the concepts of meaning and of language remain hypothetical or metaphorical; so, by engaging in the setting up of a semantic system for an object like clothing, we wanted to observe in all its minuteness the way in which meaning functions within an object (clothing), about which it has often been said that it is a language but without this ever having been demonstrated: in short, given the metaphorical abuse of the word and the price we pay for this (we are thinking of the inevitable promotion of a certain formalism), it was finally time to enter (so to speak) into the kitchen of meaning. and on the other hand, this thorough exploration of the inside of a particular object (here Fashion clothing) should serve as a model for a series of similar explorations inside other objects with semiology not being able to operate fully until all systems of signification be defined by their differences and their residual commonality. Then, by extension, major objects in mass culture (to remain within the sociological field) would then need to be listed, from food to journalistic narrative; but the analysis of the Fashion system, whatever the imperfections and gaps, will perhaps already be able to supply a few operational models.Finally, as a semantic object, Fashion clothing has a fundamental link to what is generally called global society in that to practise semiological analysis, however narrowly focused, is to rediscover this society in all its anthropological generality. But to uncover this link, we must—paradoxically—accept that sociology and semiology, though starting with the same object, namely Fashion, develop in two entirely different directions. The sociology of Fashion starts out with a model that is imaginary in origin (clothing conceived by the fashion-group), and then continues to completion (or at least will continue, the day it comes into existence) by using a series of real clothes (this is the problem for the dissemination of clothing models); and therefore sociology aims to systematize behaviours which it can easily link to social conditions, living standards and collective attitudes. Semiology does not go down the same road at all; it describes an article of clothing which remains imaginary, or if you like, purely intellective, which leads to an identification not of practices but of images. The sociology of Fashion is tuned entirely to a sociology of real clothing; the semiology of fashion to a sociology of representations; semiology’s horizon is not real clothing but ideology in general and within this horizon the Fashion object slowly dissolves to reveal a global phenomenon par excellence: the human intelligible. It is not simply via (or starting from) clothing that Fashion goes global, it is also through the ‘intelligible’. all semiology, whatever the particularity or triviality of its object, is the search for this general intelligibility (which is not, because of this, permanently removed from the history or society in which it operates). Therefore semiological analysis, even when it remains methodologically immanent to its object via its acceptance of the pertinence principle, itself demands a sociological dimension; however, we cannot then attach it back on to classical sociologies of ‘knowledge’, because the intelligible is not only—or perhaps ever— directly part of the intellectual; but rather it has to be inserted into the socio-logic, or sociology of classifications which Durkheim was already thinking about; so semiology is research into where things are placed, and not into the things themselves.having accepted the principle of pertinence and having also selected the particular sort of pertinence, the next step was to decide on the corpus of materials on which it was going to be brought to bear. at first, we wanted to analyse the semantics of real clothes that are worn and not those of Fashion clothing. This project was attractive because, as we have just said, it allowed us to link up with an authentic sociology of Fashion by studying its rhythms of renewal and its circuits of dissemination. But without even having to make a choice between a sociology of practices and a socio-logics of the intelligible, it was still difficult to undertake an initial ‘exercise’ in semiological analysis on an object that was probably full of meaning (real clothing is undeniably meaningful: humans communicate via clothes, tell each other if they are getting married, being buried, going hunting or to the beach, if they are department store staff or intellectuals, if they are doing their military service or painting), but in which finalities other than those of meaning remained extremely active (protection, ornamentation, economics), and which mixed, in a way which was tricky to discern, the individual act and the social institution, or what is termed, in Saussurian language, parole and langue. Since the object of the research was essentially the testing out of a method and not directly the discovery of a sociological truth, it was probably better to accept a simplification in all its openness, and to reduce the corpus by restricting it to descriptions of a particular clothing type, the sort covered in fashion publications and which we will call here fashion clothing.But as well, although we still wanted to make sure that we remained in contact with the future tasks of a sociological study of real clothing, we restricted our analysis here to Fashion clothing, constituting a privileged object of semiological analysis as it does for three reasons. First, because those extra-semantic ends, which were, as we saw, such a nuisance to real clothing, are absent here: fashion clothing neither serves to protect nor to adorn but at best to signify protection by adornment: its being is entirely absorbed in its meaning. Second, since it is not being worn but only being proposed, Fashion clothing is a pure institution, devoid of all practical use; it is a langue without parole and moreover this langue is artificial, elaborated not by the sum of users who are more or less conscious of their actions but by a group of decision-makers (the fashion group): Fashion clothing is, if you like, a logo-technics. Finally, Fashion clothing offers to the semiologist something human languages have always refused to the linguist: a pure synchrony; Fashion’s synchrony changes suddenly every year but during that year it is absolutely stable: it is possible therefore to work on the fashionable without having to divide it up artificially as the linguist is obliged to do with the muddle of messages in a diachrony.Since it was a question of establishing the semantic system of fashion clothing in its institutional purity—and not its usage—the corpus was to be formed from that material which showed the clothing style with its origins, that is at the moment when it was artificially constituted in language and before being disseminated via real clothing; and it is this material that is found obviously in the fashion magazine. one might conceivably suggest that the small-scale models used by the big fashion designers, such as those sent to the studio or presentational models, constitute a purer corpus since they are closer to the logo- technical act; but precisely, this act is never fully finished until it reaches the fashion magazine stage, because it is the language of the magazine which gives the clothing created by haute couture the structure of a signifier and the power to signify; before being taken up by the fashion magazine, haute couture clothing (whether a small-scale model or a clothing range) is much closer to a working model than to a semantic unit (it is the prototype of a magical display, determining an act of fabrication, and its value is technological). Clothing that is meaningful in its entirety is to be found in the Fashion magazine (all the more so since the ‘readership’ here is massive), and therefore it is Fashion magazines which must constitute the corpus for our analysis.Is this all Fashion magazines? Certainly not. Two types of limit on choices could be applied here, both authorised, and even recommended, by the stated aim of the research, which is to establish a formal system and not to describe a concrete Fashion, to provide the general ‘grammar’ of Fashion and not its sociology. First, those selected in relation to time; if we are looking for a structure, it is a good idea to work on only one state of Fashion, that is a synchronic one. now, as we have said, the synchrony of Fashion is decided by fashion itself: it is the Fashion for one year. For this we decided to work on the magazines from the year 1958–59 (June to June), but this date obviously has no methodological importance; we could have chosen any other year, for what we were looking to describe was not such and such a Fashion, but Fashion; once collected, isolated from its year, the object (or utterance [l’énoncé]) found its place in a purely formal system of functions. So there will be no indication here of any contingent Fashion, even less of a history of Fashion: we did not want to look at the substance of Fashion, but only at the structure of its signs.Similarly (and here is the second limit placed on the corpus), there would have been no interest in going through all the magazines for one year unless we had wanted to isolate the substantial differences (ideological, aesthetic or social) between them; from a sociological point of view this would be a crucial issue, because each magazine would refer both to a socially defined audience and to a particular body of representations (and we have suggested continually how semantic analysis could help with this problem), but the differential sociology of magazines, audiences and ideologies was not the stated aim of this research: we have never aimed here at anything but a pre-sociology of Fashion. So we went through in an exhaustive way only two magazines (Elle and Jardin des Modes), without denying the possibility of finding some things in other publications (mainly Vogue and Echo de la Mode), as well as the weekly pages which certain daily newspapers provide on Fashion. What was important, given the semiological project, was to constitute a corpus which was reasonably saturated with all the possible differences in vestimentary signs; conversely, it did not matter if there was an element of repetition in these differences, for what makes meaning is not repetition but difference; structurally, a rare Fashion trait is as important as a frequent one, a gardenia as important as a long skirt; the aim here was to distinguish the units, not to count them.having then established these principles, we needed to decide what we were looking for. The rule was obviously to work on the pure and homogenous units. So all the notations which could imply any finality other than meaning were removed from the inventory: such things as sales advertising, even if they seemed to describe a Fashion and the technical instructions for manufacture of the clothing (patterns). neither did we retain make-up or hairstyle because, if these elements do indeed compete in terms of Fashion, they are nevertheless not made of the same material as clothing. There was still one formidable ambiguity: the occasions where photographed (or drawn) clothing and then clothing commented upon in a written text were mixed in the same magazine and often on the same page. These two systems obviously do not have the same substance; in one, it is looks, forms, surfaces, colours which count; in the other, sentences and words; so we had to sacrifice one of the two structures because in keeping both we could not hope to obtain homogenous units; we decided to opt for the system of verbalized clothing because in this system the verbal utterance of the Fashion signifieds constitutes an irreplaceable methodological advantage. So no Fashion photography will be treated, and it is only the system of written Fashion clothing, provided by articulated language, that is reconstituted here.There are two ways of judging a piece of work: according to the project itself or according to how the project has been carried out. If we still have faith in the semiological project, we have nothing but doubts (and often unpleasant certainties) about how well it has been fulfilled here. It is not the dryness of this work, its abstraction, lack of ‘ideas’, its apparent distance from the big ‘problems’ of the world, it is not even the intuitive nature of certain purely empirical assertions which should have only been made with a commutative analysis, for which this work may be reproached. on the contrary, it is its timidness in the face of formalism and its impotence in the face of the system; for, on the one hand, we were not able to avoid a certain number of subtle detours around substantialism, for example often giving a crypto-psychological description to the variants, such is the inveterate naturalism in us; but against this, we did not know how, at many moments, to ‘establish’ elegantly (in the mathematical sense of the term) the system (or even how to tie it up or put it together), leaving behind both ‘holes’ and assemblages which are perhaps useless; some important theoretical points (for example the binary nature of oppositions) have not been cleared up; the belief upon which this work sits, that language is not the real, has perhaps led to a nominalism which was never defensible. So there would be fears that this series of failures might compromise the semiological project itself in the eyes of those who come into contact with this work, if we did not think that in the social sciences there was no definitive method (because the notion of result is itself illusory, evanescent) and that the capacity of a system to go wrong is as important as its capacity to work: therefore semiology will happily defer to a new system; all it needs is for the latter to be able to take shape within the former—albeit clumsily.
Fashion, a Strategy of Desire: Round-table Discussion with Roland Barthes, Jean Duvignaud and Henri LefebvreFashion is changing. Short skirts, loud colors, boys in long shirts and girls in trousers. Women’s liberation? Loss of male virility? It is not so simple. So we asked three sociologists to consider this debate, apparently frivolous but which they are studying very seriously. Henri Lefebvre, Professor at the Sorbonne, is amongst other things the author of a Sociology of Everyday Life; he is currently working on a study Fashion and Culture. Professor at the Ecole des Hautes Etudes, Roland Barthes is, as we know, the author of mythologies and has for a long time been teaching a course on ‘the Fashion System’ using women’s magazines. As for Jean Duvignaud, Professor at the University of Orleans, his recent books on theatre (Sociology of Theatre, and The actor) incline him to see in fashion an extension of theatrical performance.Le Nouvel Observateur: How is the sociologist interested by fashion?Roland Barthes: Fashion has been a privileged object for sociologists since Spencer. Fashion is a phenomenon both of innovation and conformity. So there is a paradox here which cannot but hold the attention of sociologists. We all follow fashion and, in theory, it is made up only of what is new. There is then a sort of contradiction in terms. you have to imitate that which is in fashion in order not to be imitable . . .Henri Lefebvre: yes, just so long as we do not restrict fashion to clothing. Fashion is also concerned as much with literature, painting, music... It is a general phenomenon. The study of fashion can be particularized by looking at clothing but it is the whole of society which is implicated.Jean Duvignaud: To stick with clothing fashion, I get the impression that, since the revolution brought about by Paul Poiret—getting rid of the corset, shortening of skirts etc.—fashion has been a way for women of displaying their existence, in a society dominated by masculine values. notice how women’s fashion is, by and large, defined and thought about by men.HL: It plays with the material or visual forms proposed by men; but, so as these are absorbed by women, there must be something however which originates with women...RB: a pseudo-psychoanalyst in america says that men often create aberrant forms of fashion to avenge themselves on women, to disfigure them.JD: When fashion undresses women in the way that today’s does, it is not to disfigure them... Since the 1920s we have seen an explosion in new forms, in the varieties of forms to be combined, which suggests a much greater freedom.Le NO: In your view, does a woman dress for herself rather than, for example, to please men?HL: here we are in a very ambiguous domain, linked to the ‘hygiene’ of clothes, which is there both to veil and to show what it is hiding, to dissimulate or to suggest something other than what it is revealing. The trick is the way in which this ambiguity is used.RB: It is for this reason that, psychoanalytically, clothing has been likened to a neurosis, a slight neurosis, to the precise extent that it hides and advertises at the same time. In his Psychology of Clothes, the Englishman Flügel provides a psychological interpretation for the increase in the number of clothes. he cites the example of oriental peoples, for whom wearing a dress is a sign of authority. In modern Western civilization, the super-Ego is manifested in the tight collar, etc. But here, we are getting away from fashion.Le NO: And above all from these new fashions, from short skirts, for example, which embarrass so many men...HL: When men and women meet there is a perpetual tension. The women never stop striking up poses, changing their body line, adjusting their skirt to the right length, or, on the contrary, revealing themselves. The men no longer know what they can and should look at... This malaise is at the same time useful for communication—or at least it does not interrupt it. you might say that designers maintain this tension on purpose...JD: In the regions of the world where women go around naked, the arrival of clothing made of printed material made the women more desired by the men. It is almost like Baudelaire’s idea of the femme parée: nudity is attractive only when culture recreates it.HL: In the case of fashion, it is merely a question of a superficial eroticization of human relationships which are not resolved by this.RB: The great historical prototypes of fashion only change every fifty years. The oscillations are very regular and historical events do not affect them. of course, within these rhythms, there are micro-variations: skirt length, for example, can change several times in ten years. But the global rhythm is not affected by these micro-variations. after a period of short skirts, we will automatically have a period of long skirts.HL: Today, class phenomena are becoming blurred or are disappearing. But for a long time it was the women of the bourgeoisie who would wear long skirts, whereas lower-class women wore short skirts... But contrary to what Barthes was saying, I think that technical developments do influence fashion. around 1920 we had the petite aviatrix, now we have the petite cosmonaut.RB: I always resist linking historical content to clothing forms.JD: There are perhaps no direct links between fashion and history, but there are links with certain key changes within societies.Le NO: Many women think that today’s fashion is not ‘comfortable’. Daily life, the car, would suggest other forms of clothing for them. 
RB: In reality fashion is never functional, never utilitarian. If women bought dresses only when they needed them, if a society bought clothes only because of wear and tear, there wouldn’t be any fashion: the buying rhythm must be faster than that of clothing wearing out.HL: What bothers me in what you are saying is that you allow no space for invention. There are nevertheless technologies, forms, new materials . . .RB: an invention which is purely that of combining remains an invention. a limited number of elements to be combined can produce the impression, a justified one, of a creation.JD: It used to be the case that the manifestations of women’s fashion were the forms of theatrical representation reserved for an elite. nowadays, the acting takes place in the street. never have aspirations towards performance been as pronounced as today. With its aspects of fantasy, fashion corresponds to a need for a theatricalization in our lives as they become less and less authentic. We are going towards an affirmation of individual existence but one which is destroyed by industrial society, towards the need to create a false existence which we then want to become true.Le NO: Fashion today lays emphasis also on youth.RB: more than youth, we should speak of a ‘junior style’, as defined by the boutiques on Rue de la Pompe, with elements borrowed from the flea market: a junior fashion where the two sexes take on values which are hard to distinguish.JD: here we are seeing the need to exist through costume...HL: What is rather strange, since fashion is mimetic, is the way people claim a personality via a model.RB: We have not talked enough about the profoundly narcissistic and erotic value of clothes. That includes all fashions. however, paradoxically, I would say that there is not any ‘figure’ of fashion which is erotic in itself; a body which is completely covered can be deemed as erotic by society. Eroticism is linked to the contrast in norms in any one society; taking off clothes is not an erotic act in itself.HL: Strategy of Desire is the title of a book on advertising...RB: yes, by Dichter, an american ‘psychoanalyst’, consulted all over the world by advertisers of cigars, beer, fashion etc. he is absolutely right about what is going to be fashionable over the next few years.
Le NO: Well, what is it going to be?RB: We will see, in clothes, the further attenuation of the difference between the sexes. men will wear perfume. Women will have tattoos . . .HL: Let’s not forget that fashion is a game. Getting dressed up is wanting to play.Fashion and the Social SciencesFashion consists of imitating that which has first shown itself as inimitable. This mechanism, paradoxical at first glance, is all the more interesting to sociology in that this discipline is principally concerned with modern, technical, industrial societies and fashion is a phenomenon which historically is particular to these societies. It must be pointed out that there are peoples and societies without fashion, for example ancient Chinese society, where clothing was strictly coded in an almost immutable way. The absence of fashion corresponded to the totally stagnant nature of society.For civilizations without writing, fashion poses a very interesting problem, though this has hardly been studied. This problem belongs to the sociology of cultural exchange: in countries like those in the new Africa, traditional, indigenous clothing, clothing that is unchanging and not subject to fashion, comes up against the phenomenon of fashion originating in the West. This results in compromises, especially for women’s clothing. The major ‘patterns’, models and forms of indigenous clothing are often maintained either in the shape and the form of the clothing or in the types of colors and designs employed; but the clothing is subject to the fashion rhythms of the West, that is to an annual production of fashion and to a renewal of detail. What is interesting in this occurrence is the meeting of a vestimentary civilization not based on fashion with the phenomenon of fashion. It seems that we could conclude that fashion is not linked to such and such a particular form of clothing but rather is exclusively a question of rhythm, a question of rate in time.Fashion poses a more acute and more paradoxical problematic to historians than it does to sociologists. The sort of public opinion maintained and promoted by the press and its letters pages etc. presents fashion as an essentially capricious phenomenon, based on the creative faculty of the designer. according to public opinion, fashion is still located within a mythology of unfettered creativity that enables it to evade both the systematic and the habitual, resting upon a rather romantic notion of an inexhaustible abundance of spontaneous creativity. Isn’t it said that fashion designers can do anything with nothing?historians, or to be more accurate, ethnologists have studied this creative aspect of fashion. The well-known american ethnologist Kroeber made a rich and in-depth study of women’s evening dress in the West, stretching back about three centuries and using reproductions of engravings. having adjusted the dimensions of these plates due to their diverse origins, he was able to analyze the constant elements in fashion features and to come up with a study that was neither intuitive nor approximate, but precise, mathematical and statistical. he reduced women’s clothing to a certain number of features: length and size of the skirt, size and depth of the neckline, height of the waistline. he demonstrated unambiguously that fashion is a profoundly regular phenomenon which is not located at the level of annual variations but on the scale of history. For practically 300 years, women’s dress was subject to a very precise periodic oscillation: forms reach the furthest point in their variations every fifty years. If, at any one moment, skirts are at their longest, fifty years later they will be at their shortest; thus skirts become long again fifty years after being short and a hundred years after being long.Kroeber also showed regular connections between, for example, the variations in the length of the skirt and the width of the neckline; certain features are linked in the rhythm of fashion.The historian is presented here with a fascinating problem, namely that of a particular cultural system which appears to escape all historical determinants. So the West has seen, in 300 years, many changes of regime, many evolutions and many ideological, sentimental and religious upheavals; and yet none of these important historical events has had any effect on the content or even on the rhythms of fashion. The French revolution did not really fundamentally change this rhythm. no one in their right mind can establish the slightest link between a high waistline and the Consulate; the most one can say is that major historical events can speed up or slow down the absolutely regular returns of certain fashions.men’s clothing has a slightly different history from that of women’s clothing. Contemporary Western men’s clothing was constituted in its general form (basic pattern) at the start of the nineteenth century and was influenced by two factors. The first is a formal factor coming from England: men’s clothing originates in the Quaker outfit (tight, buttoned jacket, in neutral colors). The second factor is an ideological one. The democratization of society led to the promotion of the values of work over idleness, and developed in men an ideology of self-respect, originating with the English. In the anglomania at the end of the eighteenth century, self-control found itself incarnated in France in the archetypically austere, constrained and closed nature of male clothing. This clothing ensured that class differences were not visible.Prior to this, societies had clothing which was completely coded, with any difference depending on whether one belonged to the aristocracy, to the bourgeoisie or to the world of the peasant. as part of the democratization process, the many types of male apparel disappeared, leaving one type of clothing. But just as the suppression of social classes at the start of the nineteenth century was illusory (for these classes continued to exist), so men belonging to the upper classes were obliged, so as to distinguish themselves from the masses, to vary the detail on their outfits, since they were no longer able to change their form. They elaborated this new notion, which was not at all democratic, and called it distinction—the word is suitably ambiguous. It was a question of distinguishing oneself in social terms; by distinguishing oneself socially, one was, one is, ‘distinguished’. From this we get dandyism: the extremely refined choice of details. a man in the nineteenth century, no longer able to modify the form of his jacket, would distinguish himself from the common man by the manner in which he tied his cravat or wore his gloves...Since then men’s clothing has not really undergone any major changes. But today, a new phenomenon can be seen evolving: the growth of a truly young person’s clothing. up until now, the young person, even the child, did not wear any outfits specific to them: children were dressed like adults, but using smaller models. Then we saw the appearance of clothing for children, followed by a fashion for young people. This latter is becoming an imperative, imperialist even; to the extent that we must now study men’s fashion in terms of adolescent fashion.In this domain there are micro-sociological phenomena, micro- fashions; these change about every two years. There used to be blue jeans, black jacket, leather jacket; now we have the Rockers fashion: tight jacket like that worn by Alfred de Musset, very long hair... This masculine fashion can be found only in young people, juniors.Clothing—I am not talking about fashion—knows three timescales, three rhythms, three histories.one of the discoveries of contemporary historical science has been to show that historical time cannot be conceived of as linear and unique because history is made up of a number of timescales of different lengths which lie over each other. There are absolutely specific events; there are situations of longer duration called conjunctures; and finally there are structures which last even longer.Clothing is affected by all three of these timescales. The longest covers the archetypal forms of clothing in a given civilization. For centuries and within a specific geographical area, oriental men wore, and still wear in part, a dress; in Japan it is the kimono, in Mexico the poncho, etc. This is the basic pattern, the basic model for a civilization. Within this timescale moderate but perfectly regular variations take place. The third timescale in short could be called the time of micro- fashions. We can see this in our Western civilization today when fashion changes every year. In fact, these annual variations interest the press and commerce more than they actually affect the general model. We are subjected to a kind of optical illusion which makes us attribute great importance to the annual variation in forms whereas in fact, in historical terms, these variations are merely part of larger, regular rhythms.There may be a problem one day if the perfectly regular half-century rhythm of fashion were to change. a dress would then normally reach its shortest length in ten or twenty years, then pass through the apparent return of the long dress, and then the cycle would start again with the long dress passing through the apparent return of the short one. We might think that, if this rhythm were shaken up, skirts would probably remain short. It would be interesting to study this phenomenon and link a shake-up of the rhythm to something happening in the history of contemporary civilization...If Kroeber’s rhythm were disrupted, it might be due to the growth and globalization of culture, of clothing, of food and by a kind of equalization of cultural objects, of a jostling together that is so intense that the fashion rhythm would be changed. a new history of fashion will begin.Changes in rhythm belong to no one. The expression ‘a fashion has come from america’ is very ambiguous as it is true and false at the same time. Change, supposedly brought about by a fashion, has no origin: it is in the formal law which governs the human mind and in the rotations of these forms in the world. however the origins of the content of fashion can indeed be located, that is the borrowing of a form or a detail which exist already, such as the hairstyle of an actor or an actress, or the way of wearing a dress. Emerging from this question of origins is the notion of mastering fashion, but this very complicated subject is secondary and does not directly interest sociology.Some people want sociologists to say that the men’s fashion for long hair comes from the Beatles; this is correct, but it would be wrong to construct the personality of today’s young man in this way and to induce that there is a feminization, or a laziness, of character taking place because of long hair. If hair has become long, it is because it was short before. I am summarizing (and in a rather brusque fashion) my ideas here because I subscribe to a formalist interpretation of the fashion phenomenon. It seems a bit misleading to stuff a phenomenon full of apparently natural contents, none of which are anything of the sort. People who write on the subject of clothing are always tempted to make these psychological links. To consider variations as part of a feminization of clothing seems illusory to me. There is no feature of clothing which is naturally feminine; all there is is a rotation, regular turn-arounds of forms.What is at stake in clothing is a particular meaning of the body, of the person. hegel was already saying that clothes made the body meaningful and that therefore they allowed the move to be made from simple feeling to meaning. Psychoanalysts too have concerned themselves with the meaning of clothes. Flügel, using Freudian categories, has analyzed clothing, and shown that dressing functioned for man as a kind of neurosis; since it simultaneously both hides and advertises the body in exactly the same way that neurosis hides and reveals what a person does not want to say by exhibiting symptoms and symbols. Clothing would in some way be analogous to the phenomenon that reveals our feelings when we blush; our face turns red, we hide our embarrassment at the very moment when we are advertising it.Clothing concerns all of the human person, all the body, all the relationships of man to body as well as the relationships of the body to society, which explains why great writers have often been preoccupied by dressing in their works. We can find beautiful pages on this subject in Balzac, Baudelaire, Edgar Poe, Michelet, Proust; they all realized that clothing was an element which involved, as it were, the whole of being.Sartre treats this question from a philosophical point of view when he shows that clothing allows man to ‘assume his freedom’, to constitute himself as he chooses, even if what he has chosen to be represents what others have chosen for him: society made Genet into a thief, and so Genet chooses to be a thief. Clothing is very close to this phenomenon; it seems that it has interested writers and philosophers because of its links with personality, of its capacity to change one’s being for another; personality makes fashion; it makes clothing; but inversely, clothing makes personality. There is certainly a dialectic between these two elements. The final answer depends on our own personal philosophy.In the eighteenth century many books were written on clothing. They were descriptive works but were based explicitly, and very consciously, on the coding of clothes, that is on the link between certain types of dressing with certain professions, with certain social classes, certain towns and certain regions. Clothing was perceived as a kind of language, as a kind of grammar: the clothes code. So we can see that clothing is part of that very busy activity in which every object is given a meaning. For all time, clothing has been the object of codification.This brings us to revise a traditional point of view that at first glance seems reasonable and which maintained that man invented clothing for three reasons: as protection against harsh weather, out of modesty for hiding nudity and for ornamentation to get noticed. This is all true. But we must add another function, which seems to me to be more important: the function of meaning. man has dressed himself in order to carry out a signifying activity. The wearing of an item of clothing is fundamentally an act of meaning that goes beyond modesty, ornamentation and protection. It is an act of signification and therefore a profoundly socialact right at the very heart of the dialectic of society.
On The Fashion SystemF. Gaussen: The Fashion System presents itself as a ‘book on method’ with reference to semiology. Could you tell us what semiology is?Roland Barthes: It was Saussure who first postulated the existence of a general science of signs, which he had called semiology. he thought that linguistics would be only a part of this science. This semiological project was then taken up thanks to the development of linguistics and of the social sciences. People came to the conclusion that many cultural objects used by humans constituted systems of communication and therefore of meaning. one could say that all of culture, in the widest sense of the word, is beholden to a science of meaning. The most seemingly utilitarian of objects—food, clothes, shelter—and especially those which are based on language such as literature (whether good or bad literature), press stories, advertising etc., invite semiological analysis.FG: Is it possible to distinguish signs that are totally independent of language?RB: obviously we could mention very elementary systems such as the highway code or aircraft landing signs. But, in my view, I’m certain that the study of non-linguistic signs is an abstraction, a utopia. real culture contains only objects which are full of human language, whether it be in description, commentary, or conversation... our civilization is a civilization of the written word as much as it is one of the image. Written language has very precise functions of abstraction, of knowledge, of choice of meanings. To live in a civilization purely of the image would create a certain anxiety because the image always has several meanings. It is for this reason that photos in newspapers are always captioned: to reduce the risk engendered by a multiplicity of meanings.FG: Your study seems to rest on a certain paradox. That is, though fashion deploys very varied systems of expression, especially the image, you have chosen to limit your research to the written description of clothes, as found in magazines such as Elle or Jardin des modes. Why?RB: originally I had planned to study real clothing, worn by everyone in the street. I gave up. The reason for this is that fashion clothing is complex in that it deploys a number of ‘substances’: the material, photography, language... now, there has not been any applied semiological work carried out as yet. It was necessary to give priority to problems of method. Because of this I preferred to choose an object as ‘pure’ as possible to analyse, that is one which rests on a single ‘substance’. I studied fashion clothing as it is refracted through the written language of specialist magazines. all I retained was the description, that is the transformation of an object into language.originally this work was meant to be in some way the start of a general program of semiology which would have covered all the cultural systems in our civilization: clothes, food, the city . . . But, inspired by new research, this semiological project itself is evolving and it is starting to encounter the specific problems generated by the objects it is trying to analyze: are we right to constitute food for example as a system of signs? however limited this book on fashion may be, it poses the problem of knowing if there really is an object that we call fashion clothing.FG: This ‘Fashion System’ breaks down into two systems.RB: Indeed. It is all about detecting in one simple message— the description of a fashionable dress—the overlaying of a number of systems of meaning: on the one hand, what we might call the ‘vestimentary code’ which controls a certain number of different usages, and on the other the rhetoric, that is the way in which the magazine expresses this code and which itself reflects a certain vision of the world, an ideology. Semiological analysis allows us to situate the place of ideology within the general system of meanings, without, of course, being able to go any further, since the description of particularideologies belongs to another science.FG: What guarantee of objectivity does the semiologist have in the analysis he makes of this rhetoric?RB: obviously the analysis of rhetoric requires the researcher to rely on their own feeling as a reader, something which might shock the positivist procedures associated with experimentation. as soon as we study language, we come up against this obstacle. There is no ‘proof’ of language other than its readability, its immediate understanding. In order to prove the analysis of a language being made you have always to come back to the ‘linguistic sentiment’ of the person who is speaking. In any case, my exteriority to the language that I am analyzing is only provisional. Indeed, my own description itself could in turn be taken up by another wider and more coherent system of explanation. I think that semiology is an accurate method, but this accuracy can itself become the object of other languages. I do not have a positivist feeling with regard to semiology; rather a historical one.FG: Your study presents itself as a kind of syntax of semiology. It works hard to create units, rules, categories. Do you think that this method has a universal value and could be applied to any object?RB: This way of researching, which by the way is not original and comes from linguistics, may provisionally have a universal value as a method of discovery. It involves breaking things down into units, classifying them and examining their rules of combination, like a grammarian. obviously, if the object changes, the method itself must be modified. Classifications will turn out differently.FG: What image of fashion have you kept from your analysis?RB: The title of my book, The Fashion System, is pure provocation. For me fashion is indeed a system. Contrary to the myth of improvisation, of caprice, of fantasy, of free creativity, we can see that fashion is strongly coded. It is ruled by combination in which there is a finite reserve of elements and certain rules of change. The whole set of fashion features for each year is found in the collection of features which has its own rules and limits, like grammar. These are purely formal rules. For example, there are some elements of clothing that can be put together, but others which are not allowed. If fashion appears to us to be unpredictable this is because we are using only a small human memory. as soon as we widen it to its historical dimension we find a very marked regularity.The second image of fashion that I have taken from my analysis is a more ethical one, more a part of my own preoccupations. It seemed to me that there were two fashions. on the one hand, fashion tries hard to make the written item of clothing correspond to uses, characters, seasons, functions: ‘A dress for evening wear, for shopping, for spring, for the student, for the carefree young girl...’. here the arbitrary nature of fashion is sidestepped, hidden beneath this rationalized, naturalist lexicon. Fashion is lying. It is hiding behind social and psychological alibis.on the other hand there is another vision of fashion which rejects this system of equivalences and sets up a truly abstract and poetic function. This is a fashion of idleness, of luxury, but which has the merit of declaring itself as pure form. In this way it becomes part of literature. a fascinating example of this literary connection is supplied by Mallarmé who wrote, just for himself, a little fashion magazine: La Dernière Mode. This was a real fashion magazine, with descriptions of dresses such as you might find, minus the talent, in Elle. But, at the same time, these descriptions are, for the author, a deeply important, almost metaphysical, exercise using the Mallarméan themes of nothingness, of the trinket, of inanity. It is an emptiness which is not absurd, a nothingness which is constructed as a meaning.FG: You indicate in your preface that your research is ‘already dated’. What do you mean?RB: This study uses operational concepts—‘sign, signifier, signified’— which if not challenged have been at least considerably remodelled by research these past few years, by people such as Lévi-Strauss and Lacan. This vocabulary is being somewhat questioned at the moment. Thinking about meaning has become enriched but also divided, with antagonisms appearing. From this point of view, my research looks a little naive. It is an ‘untamed’ semiology. But I will say in my defence that these rather fixed concepts are in fact applied to an object which is a profound part of mass culture, part of a certain alienation. mass society always tends to get stuck on defined, named, separated meanings. This is why the fixed concepts that I use are those which go the best with fashion. They may be simplistic in the way they describe what is going on in the depths of the human psyche, but they retain all their pertinence when it comes to analysing our society.Fashion Debates and Interpretations.
The Contest between Chanel and Courrèges. Refereed by a PhilosopherIf today you open a history of our literature, you should find there the name of a new classical author: Coco Chanel. Chanel does not write with paper and ink (except in her leisure time), but with material, with forms and with colors; however, this does not stop her being commonly attributed with the authority and the panache of a writer of the classical age: elegant like racine, Jansenist like Pascal (whom she quotes), philosophical like La Rochefoucauld (whom she imitates by delivering her own maxims to the public), sensitive like madame de Sévigné and, finally, rebellious like the ‘Grande mademoiselle’ whose nickname and function she borrows (see for example her recent declarations of war on fashion designers). Chanel, it is said, keeps fashion on the edge of barbarism all the more to overwhelm it with all the values of the classical order: reason, nature, permanence, the desire to charm and not to surprise; people are pleased to see Chanel in the pages of the Figaro newspaper where she occupies, alongside Cocteau, the fringes of polite culture.What would be the extreme opposite of this classicism if not futurism? Courrèges, it is said, dresses women from the year 2000 who are already the young girls of today. mixing, as in all legends, the person’s character with the style of the works produced, Courrèges is credited with the mythical qualities of the absolute innovator: young, tempestuous, galvanic, virulent, mad on sport (and the most abrupt of these—rugby), keen on rhythm (the presentation of his outfits is accompanied by jerky music), rash to the point of being contradictory as he invents an evening dress which is not a dress (but a pair of shorts). Tradition, common sense and feeling—without which there is no good hero in France—are tightly controlled by him and only appear discreetly at the edges of his private life: he likes walking alongside his mountain stream at home, draws like an artist and sends the only black dress in his collection to his mother in Pau.all this means that everyone feels that there is something important that separates Chanel and Courrèges—perhaps something more profound than fashion or at least something for which fashion is simply the means by which it presents itself. What might this be?The creations by Chanel challenge the very idea of fashion. Fashion (as we conceive it today) rests on a violent sensation of time. Every year fashion destroys that which it has just been admiring, it adores that which it is about to destroy; last year’s fashion, now destroyed, could offer to the victorious fashion of the current year an unfriendly word such as the dead leave to the living and which can be read on certain tombstones: I was yesterday what you are today, you will be tomorrow what I am today. Chanel’s work does not take part at all—or only slightly—in this annual vendetta. Chanel always works on the same model which she merely ‘varies’ from year to year, as one might ‘vary’ a musical theme; her work says (and she herself confirms it) that there is an ‘eternal’ beauty of woman, whose unique image is relayed to us by art history; she rejects with indignation perishable materials, paper, plastic, which are sometimes used in america to make dresses. The very thing that negates fashion, long life, Chanel makes into a precious quality.now, in the aesthetics of clothing there is a very particular, even paradoxical, value which ties seduction to long life: that is ‘chic’; ‘chic’ can handle and even demands if not the worn look, at least usage; ‘chic’ cannot stand the look of newness (we recall that the dandy Brummell would never wear an outfit without having aged it a little on the back of his servant). ‘Chic’, this sublimated time, is the key value in Chanel’s style. Courrèges’ ensembles by contrast do not have this fear: very fresh, colorful, even brightly colored, the dominant color in them is white, the absolute new; this deliberately extreme youthful fashion, with its school and sometimes childlike, even infantile, references (baby’s shoes and socks), and for which even winter is a time for light colors, is continually brand new and does not suffer from any complexes as it dresses brand new beings. From Chanel to Courrèges the ‘grammar’ of timescales changes: the unchanging ‘chic’ of Chanel tells us that the woman has already lived (and has known how to); the obstinate ‘brand-newness’ of Courrèges that she is going to live.So it is the notion of time, which is a style for one and a fashion for the other, that separates Chanel from Courrèges, as does a particular idea of the body. It is not a coincidence that Chanel’s own invention, the woman’s suit, is very close to men’s clothing. The man’s suit and the woman’s suit by Chanel have one ideal in common: ‘distinction’. In the nineteenth century ‘distinction’ was a social value; in a society which had recently been democratized and in which men from the upper classes were not now permitted to advertise their wealth—but which their wives were allowed to do for them by proxy—it allowed them to ‘distinguish’ themselves all the same by using a discreet detail. The Chanel style picks up on this historical heritage in a filtered, feminized way and it is this, furthermore, which paradoxically makes it very dated; the Chanel style corresponds to that rather brief moment in our history (which is part of Chanel’s own youth) when a minority of women went out to work and had social independence and therefore it had to transpose into clothing something of men’s values, beginning with this famous ‘distinction’, the only luxury option open to men now that work had standardized them. The Chanel woman is not the idle young girl but the young woman confronting the world of work which is itself kept discreet, evasive; of this world of work she allows to be read from her clothing, from her supple suit that is both practical and distinguished, not its content (it is not a uniform), but work’s compensation, a higher form of leisure, cruises, yachts, sleeper carriages, in short modern, aristocratic travel, as celebrated by Paul Morand and Valery Larbaud. So, of all the fashions, the Chanel style is perhaps, paradoxically, the most social, because what it fights, what it rejects, are not, as one might think, the futurist provocations of the new fashion designs but rather the vulgarities of petty bourgeois clothing; so it is in societies confronted with a newly arisen need for aesthetic self-promotion, in Moscow—where she often goes—that Chanel has the best chance of being the most successful.There is however a price to pay for the Chanel style: a certain forgetting of the body which we would say takes refuge, is absorbed, in the social ‘distinction’ of clothing. It is not Chanel’s fault: from her earliest career something new has appeared in our society which the new fashion designers are trying to translate, to codify; a new social class, unforeseen by sociologists, has been born—youth. as the body is its only asset, youth does not need to be vulgar or ‘distinguished’: it simply is. Take the Chanel woman: we can locate her social milieu, her jobs, her leisure activities, her travels. Then take the Courrèges woman: we do not ask what she does, who her parents are, what her income is—she is young, necessarily and sufficiently so. Both simultaneously abstract and material, Courrèges fashion seems to have assigned itself only one function: that of making clothing into a very clear sign for the whole body. a sign does not necessarily involve exhibiting (fashion is always chastened); it is said, perhaps too often, that the short skirt ‘shows’ the leg. Such things are bit more complicated than that. What probably matters to a designer like Courrèges is not the very material stripping off that annoys everyone, but rather to provide women’s clothing with that allusive expression which makes the body appear close, without ever exhibiting it, to bring us into a new relationship with the young bodies all around us, by suggesting to us, via a whole play of forms, colors and details that is the art of clothes designing, that we could strike up a friendship with these young people. The whole Courrèges style is contained in this conditional, for which the female body is the stake: it is the conditional tense that we find in jackets with very short sleeves (which show no nudity at all, but register in our minds the idea of audacity), it is in the florid transparency of evening-wear shorts, in the new two-piece dresses worn for dancing that are flimsy like underwear, in this fashion without attachments (in the real and figurative sense) in which the body always seems to be close, friendly and seductive, simple and decent.So, on one side we have tradition (with its internal acts of renewal), and on the other innovation (with its implicit constants); here classicism (albeit in sensitive mode), there modernism (albeit in mundane mode). We have to believe that society needs this contest, because society has been ingenious at launching it—at least for the last few centuries—in all domains of art, and in an infinite variety of forms; and if we now see it clearly breaking into fashion, it is because fashion too is also an art, in the same way as literature, painting and music are.What is more, the Chanel-Courrèges contest teaches us—or rather confirms to us—the following: today, thanks to the formidable growth of the means of communication such as the press, television, the cinema even, fashion is not only what women wear, it is also what all women (and all men) look at and read about: our fashion designers’ inventions please, or annoy us, just like a novel, a film or a record. We project on to Chanel suits for women and on to Courrèges shorts everything that is to do with beliefs, prejudices and resistances, in short the whole of one’s own personal history, what we call in one (perhaps simplistic) word: taste.and all this suggests perhaps a way of understanding the Chanel- Courrèges contest (if at least you have no intention of buying either Chanel or Courrèges). as part of this broad everyday culture in which we participate through everything we read and see, the Chanel style and Courrèges fashion set up an opposition which is much less a matter of choice than something to be interpreted. Chanel and Courrèges, these two names are like the two rhymes in the same couplet or the contrasting exploits of a couple of heroes without which there is no nice story. If we want to keep these two sides of the same sign together, and undifferentiated—that is, the sign of our times—then fashion will have been made into a truly poetic subject, constituted collectively, so that we are then presented with the profound spectacle of an ambiguity rather than that of us being spoiled by a pointless choice.A Case of Cultural Criticism.The town where these lines are being written is a small meeting place for hippies, mainly British, american and Dutch; they spend all day here in a very lively square in the old town, mixed in with (but not mixing with) the local population who, either through natural tolerance, amusement, habit or interest, accept them, exist alongside them and let them get on with life without ever understanding them or ever being surprised by them either. This gathering has certainly none of the density or diversity of the huge assemblies in San Francisco or new york; but, because hippyism in this place is out of its normal context, which is that of a rich and moralizing civilization, its usual meaning is fragmented; transplanted into a fairly poor country, and disoriented not by geographical but by economic and social exoticism (which is infinitely more divisive), here the hippy becomes contradictory (and no longer simply contrary), and this contradictoriness of the hippy is of interest to us because, on the level of social protest, it raises questions about the very link between the political and the cultural.This contradictoriness is as follows. as an oppositional character, the hippy adopts a diametrically opposed position to the main values which underpin the way of life in the West (bourgeois, neo-bourgeois or petty bourgeois); the hippy knows full well that this way of life is one where materialism is central and it is consumption of goods that he aims to undermine. as far as food is concerned, the hippy rebels against mealtimes and menus (he eats very little, whenever and wherever) and rejects eating alone (when we eat in a group it is only ever done by simply adding extra individual portions, as symbolized now by the use of cloth or straw placemats which, gesturing towards the elegant, mark out the eating space of each guest; whereas the hippies, in Berkeley for example, have a collective cooking pot, communal cooking). as for accommodation, there is the same collectivism (one room for several people), as well as nomadism signaled by the bag, (that pouch) which the hippies have dangling around their long legs. Clothing (the outfit, should we say) is, as we know, a specific sign, the main choice made by the hippy; in relation to the norms in the West, there is a dual subversion, the elements of which sometimes go together: either there is absolutely manic fantasy, so as to transgress the limits of what is conventional to make this into a clear sign of that transgression itself (brocade trousers; draped jackets; long, white nightshirts; going barefoot even out on the street), or by borrowing overtly from ethnic costumes: djellabas, boubous, hindu tunics, all nonetheless rendered other by some aberrant detail (necklaces, multicolored and multi- layered neckbands etc.). Cleanliness (hygiene), the most important of american values (at least mythically), is counteracted in spectacular fashion: dirt on the body, in the hair, on the clothes; clothes dragging along the street, dusty feet, fair-haired babies playing in the gutter (but somehow it is still different from real dirtiness, different from a long- engrained poverty, from a dirtiness which deforms the body, the hand; hippy dirt is different, it has been borrowed for the holidays, sprinkled over like dust, and, like a footprint, not permanent). and finally, long hair on boys, their jewelry (necklaces, multiple rings, earrings), means that the sexes are becoming indistinguishable, not so much with a view to inverting gender identities but more so a process of removing them: what they are after, by switching between the normal features that distinguish between the sexes, is the neutral, i.e. a challenge to the ‘natural’ antagonism between the sexes.We are not talking here about counter-values ‘in your mind’ by which the hippies put so much stock: drug use, withdrawal from the world, loss of aggression. It is quite clear that, if only in terms of making an impact, the hippies want to make a reaction political—clothing, accommodation, food, hygiene, sexuality are all made into reactive forces: this is meant in the Nietzschean sense; paradoxical as it may seem, the hippy (if only they would invest more intelligence into their adventure, their quest) could be one of the precursors to Nietzsche’s ‘superman’ which he found in the ultimate nihilist, the one trying to widen and push forward the reactive value to the point of cutting off any chance of it being recuperated by some positive force or other. We know that Nietzsche pointed to two different incarnations of this nihilism, Christ and Buddha, and these two encapsulate the hippies’ dreams: hippyism looks towards India (which is becoming the mecca for the hippy movement) and many young hippies (too many for the phenomenon to go unnoticed) clearly want to have a Christ-like appearance—we are talking about symbols here, and not beliefs (the author of these lines saw a local crowd, with a markedly oriental vehemence, surround and threaten a young Christ with long hair and a pale face, accused of stealing a radio. It was unclear whether he was guilty, but he had perhaps fallen foul of the local code for what theft means: it was like a veritable evangelical tableau, a pious color painting worthy of adorning a pastor’s hallway). This is the direction hippies are taking and the signs they are sending out.This direction, this meaning however (and it is what we discussed at the start) is recuperated by the context of the reality in which it has inevitably developed. In the united States, cultural contestation by the hippy is highly effective (we might say, a direct hit), because it strikes exactly (in the sensitive places) at the good consciences of the well off, the guardians of social morals and of cleanliness: so hippyism is a stage (even if a rather short one) in cultural criticism which can be justified, because it paints the exact mirror image of the American way of life. But once out of its original context, hippy protest comes up against an enemy far more significant than american conformism, even if this is backed up by security on the university campus: poverty (where economics coyly uses the expression developing countries, culture and real life use the more honest poverty). This poverty turns the hippy’s choice into a copy, a caricature of economic alienation, and this copy of poverty, though sported only lightly, becomes in fact distinctly irresponsible. For most traits invented by the hippy in opposition to his home civilization (a civilization of the rich) are the very ones which distinguish poverty, no longer as a sign, but much more severely as a clear indication, or an effect, on people’s lives: undernourishment, collective living, bare feet, dirtiness, ragged clothing, are all forces which, in this context, are not there to be used in the symbolic fight against the world of riches but are the very forces against which we should be fighting. Symbols (which the hippy consumes frenetically) are therefore no longer reactive meanings, polemical forces, nor are they critical weapons that we appropriate from a well-off civilization that conceals its image of overnourishment by constant referral to it and that tries to make overnourishment’s signifiers look glossy; if we think of them as being positive, these symbols become, not a game, or a higher form of symbolic activity, but a disguise, a lower form of cultural narcissism: as is demonstrated by linguistics, the context overturns the meaning, and the context here is that of economics.So here is the dead end for a critique of culture that is cut off from its political argument. But what’s the alternative? Could we conceive of a political critique of culture which is an active form of criticism and no longer a simply analytical or intellectual one, which would operate beyond the ideological conditioning by mass communications, in the very places, both subtle and diffuse, where the consumer is conditioned, precisely the places where the hippies play out their (incomplete) clairvoyance? Could we imagine a way of living that was, if not revolutionary, at least unobstructed? no one since Fourier has produced this image; no figure has yet been able to surmount and go beyond the militant and the hippy: the militant continues to live like a petty bourgeois, and the hippy like an inverted bourgeois; between these two, nothing. The political critique and the cultural critique don’t seem to be able to coincide.Showing How Rhetoric Works.Writing of fashion.It is clear that Fashion utterances are entirely derived not from a style but a writing; by describing an item of clothing, or how it is worn, the writer/journalist invests in his words nothing of himself [sic] nor of his psychology; he simply conforms to a certain conventional and regulated style (we might say an ethos), which furthermore announces immediately that it is from a Fashion magazine.Fashion ideology.on the rhetorical level there is a signified that corresponds to the writing of Fashion, which is Fashion ideology.The world aimed at by written Fashion ignores opposites, ... one can be presented with two apparently contradictory characteristics between which there is nothing that requires making a choice.Fashion text.as Fashion is a phenomenon of initiation, its wording naturally plays a didactic role: the Fashion text represents in some way the authoritative wording of someone who knows everything that is behind the confused, or incomplete, appearance of the visible forms; this wording therefore constitutes the moment when what is hidden becomes visible, in which one can almost see, in a secularized form, the sacred halo of divinatory texts; all the more since the knowledge of Fashion never comes without a price; it holds a sanction for those who are excluded from it: the stigma of being unfashionable.Pseudo-syntax.Indeed, without leaving behind the actual line of the words (since this guarantees the meaning of an item of clothing), we can try and replace the grammatical links (which themselves are charged with no vestimentary meaning) with a pseudo-syntax, whose articulations, removed from grammar, will have the sole aim of making manifest a vestimentary meaning, and no longer something to be understood within discourse.The support for meaning in fashionmateriality, inertia and conductivity all make the support for meaning into an original element in the Fashion system, at least in relation to language. Indeed, language has nothing about it which would resemble a support for meaning (. . .) so one cannot divide the linguistic syntagm into active, meaningful elements and inert, meaningless elements: in language everything means. The necessity and originality of the support for meaning reside precisely in the fact that clothing is not in itself a system of meaning, as language is; in terms of substance, the support represents the materiality of the item of clothing, as it exists outside of any process of meaning.Rhetoric of the observation of fact.Fashion sits at the crossroads between chance and divine decree: its decisions become a self-evident fact. all Fashion then has to do is practice a rhetoric of pure observation of fact (loose dresses are in), and all the fashion magazine has to do is report what is (‘we can see the camelhair sweater coming back’), even if, like a wise historian, it knows how to discern in a simple event the way the whole market is moving (The Fashion for black-dyed mink is growing). By making Fashion into an inevitable force, the magazine imparts to it all the ambiguity of an object without cause, but not one without will.Fashion trajectory.a fashion is recorded at the very moment it is announced, the very moment it is prescribed. The whole of Fashion rhetoric is contained in this shortcut: stating that which is being imposed; producing Fashion and then seeing in it nothing but an effect without a named cause; then retaining from this effect only the phenomenon; and finally leaving this phenomenon to develop as if its life depended solely upon itself: such is the trajectory that fashion follows so as to convert its cause, its law and its signs all at once into fact.Fashion infidelity.all new Fashion is a refusal to inherit, a subversion of the oppression left by the preceding Fashion. Fashion experiences itself as a right, the natural right of the present over the past; defined by its very infidelity, Fashion nevertheless lives in a world which it wants to come into being and which it sees as ideally stable, a world shot through with glances that are conformist.Fashion dogmatism.Fashion’s aggressiveness, whose rhythm can even be one of vendettas, ends up itself being undone by a more patient image of time; by that absolute, dogmatic, vengeful present tense in which Fashion speaks.
Closed system.The present tense of Fashion becomes here the guarantee of the system’s declared arbitrariness: this system tends to enclose its synchronic dimension more and more, as each year and in a flash it goes completely into reverse and collapses into the nothingness of the past.Fashion neurosis.Each of these todays is a triumphant structure whose order is extensive with (or alien to) time in such a way that Fashion tames the new even before producing it and so accomplishes that paradox in which the ‘new’ is both unpredictable and yet already decreed.Thus, with long-term memory abolished and with time reduced to the duo of that which is rejected and that which is inaugurated, pure Fashion, logical Fashion is never anything other than the amnesiac substitution of the present for the past. We could almost speak of a Fashion neurosis.
